“You’ve set the cat among the pigeons,” messaged a Tory MP after my interview with Liz Truss dropped on Monday night. The former prime minister’s first spoken intervention since leaving office saw Truss offer little in the way of a mea culpa, and instead set out her plans to carve out a place for herself on the backbenches as a committed tax-cutter. “Obviously I’ve got more time available now to think about these things and make the argument and that’s what I want to do,” she said of her post-prime ministerial plans. Given Rishi Sunak and Jeremy Hunt are trying to lower expectations ahead of the spring budget (and the budget after that), it’s exactly the type of intervention the government would rather avoid. The chancellor has repeatedly suggested now is not the time for tax cuts – instead they will only come “when the time is right”. Sunak has frequently said bringing down inflation must come first. He said the public were “not idiots” and understood this. The implication? Some in his party are. There are plenty within the Tory party who would be inclined to agree. Since Truss broke her silence – just over three months after leaving Downing Street – with a 4-000-word essay in the Sunday Telegraph and now her interview with the Spectator, several of her parliamentary colleagues have been publicly critical. Caroline Nokes said “a period of silence would be helpful”, while the cabinet minister Grant Shapps has said Truss’s tax cuts were clearly the wrong approach. A former aide to Truss is similarly disobliging: “I don’t think now is the right time to speak. In the past, former prime ministers have found a charitable cause rather than diving straight back in.”However, Truss appears unperturbed by the criticism. Given her place in history as the shortest-serving prime minister, she was markedly upbeat during the 50-minute sit down. Perhaps though the difficulty of that seven-week premiership explains why one of the questions she was the quickest to respond to was: would she like to be prime minister again? The answer was a polite but firm no. While Truss’s critics will no doubt find relief in those comments, the bigger concern among her opponents within her party is the effect she could soon have on the ideological debate. Her return presents Sunak with trouble on several counts. First, there are senior Tories and ministers who worry that any intervention by Truss, regardless of whether it’s separate to or even critical of Sunak, will simply remind the public of a short-lived leadership they would like voters to forget. It makes it much harder for Sunak to turn the page with the public if his predecessors are still hanging around. But more than that, Truss still holds some sway in parts of the Tory party. Notably, her interventions so far have been more focused on a Conservative-minded audience than the public at large. Truss believes one of the reasons her premiership failed was a failure by people who hold her views – small-state, low-tax, free market – to make the argument. “Was I trying to fatten the pig on market day, maybe … there’s a long history of failing to make the case and that’s what I’m thinking now,” she said. On this point, there are plenty of Tory MPs who agree. There is a sense not just on the right of the party that, after more a decade in government, the party has lost touch with its core principles. It’s one of the main reasons she won the leadership contest in the summer. Although some MPs backed the then foreign secretary in the hope of a plum job from the bookies’ favourite, plenty more did so because they preferred her brand of true-blue radicalism on tax cuts to Sunak’s more modest managerialism. The ‘leftwing economic establishment’ did not bring Liz Truss down. Reality did | Polly ToynbeeRead moreIt means that a push by Truss or the new 40-strong Conservative Growth Group – led by two MPs who served as cabinet ministers in her government – has the potential to make life difficult for Sunak. Many of the MPs worried about such a push are more concerned not about the next 18 months, but about what may come after. As the Tories continue to trail Labour heavily in the polls, lots of MPs are more inclined to discuss the likely scale of defeat come the election rather than whether they can turn things around and win a fifth term. The scale of the defeat would be a big factor in the type of debate the Tories have in the event of a loss – and the candidate who succeeds as leader of the opposition. In the event of a big loss, expect figures such as Truss and former ministers like Jacob Rees-Mogg to argue of the need to return to a more purist low-tax agenda. It’s here that Truss’s interventions – of which there will be more in the coming weeks and months – could have the biggest impact. Katy Balls is political editor of the Spectator Few public figures alive today have done more to reduce the stigma around HIV than Gareth Thomas. Since he declared his status in 2019 (saying he had been forced to, following threats of blackmail by a tabloid newspaper), the former rugby player has campaigned to promote better understanding of the virus. It’s regrettable that such a popular figurehead recently found himself at the centre of a legal controversy. Last week, it was announced that Thomas had settled a case brought by his ex-partner, Ian Baum, who in a civil claim accused Thomas of hiding his HIV status while they were a couple between 2013 and 2016. Baum alleged that Thomas “deceptively” transmitted the virus to Baum, hiding his HIV medication and “coercing” him into unprotected sex. While agreeing to pay a settlement of £75,000, Thomas made no admission of liability or guilt, and has always denied that he gave Baum HIV. However, he has confirmed that he did not tell Baum about his HIV status because he “genuinely and reasonably” believed that it was undetectable at the time because his viral load was so low that the virus could not be passed on. He acknowledges now that this belief was mistaken. There is no law that says you have to tell your partner if you have HIV, but it is possible to be prosecuted for “reckless” or “intentional” transmission. The Thomas case has brought up old questions over what the norms around sharing HIV statuses should be, and whether the law should take a stance on HIV at all. But any discussion should bear in mind that the epidemic has shifted dramatically in the decade since Baum and Thomas began their relationship. Today, while the law is unchanged, the majority of people living with HIV are undetectable (and so have a viral load so low that the virus cannot be passed on). Meanwhile, the HIV-prevention drug PrEP has become widely adopted in the gay community. Thanks to these advances, which are driven by people taking personal responsibility and creating a supportive environment for people living with HIV, there has been a massive decrease in transmissions among gay and bisexual men. If it is not possible that you will transmit to another person during sex, there is no moral obligation to share your status, any more than you would tell a casual partner that you have diabetes, for example. That said, the topic of HIV is often raised by gay men prior to sex and many would agree that the responsibility for initiating these conversations is a joint one – it doesn’t lie solely with any one individual, regardless of their status. As Baum’s lawyers pointed out, although this was a civil case, these allegations could have been pursued as a criminal offence. Should they be? At what point does the transmission of a stigmatised condition between two unlucky people become a matter for the courts? The charity aidsmap has warned that “problematic legislation” on HIV exists everywhere in the world, criminalising transmission, exposure or non-disclosure. While England is not at the worst end of the scale, aidsmap nonetheless described the number of cases brought against HIV-positive people as “unusually high”.Despite the number of cases brought, there has been only one successful prosecution in England for “intentional” transmission. This was an unusually clearcut case case: the defendant was found to have tampered with condoms (illegal in its own right), thus proving malicious intent. In rare instances such as this, HIV organisations typically agree that criminalisation is justified. Likewise, in cases of sexual violence where HIV transmission occurs, it’s reasonable to consider this an aggravating factor. But there is a consensus among HIV advocates that prosecutions for “reckless” transmission – where there is no evidence of any intention to cause harm – are unjust and counterproductive. 01:21'I've got HIV and it's OK': Gareth Thomas aims to tackle stigma – video For one, it contributes to stigma. In the recent past, tabloids have taken the tiny handful of people who have intentionally or recklessly passed on HIV and reported them using language like “HIV monsters”. As Deborah Gold, chief executive of the National Aids Trust, told me, disproportionate focus on these rare cases “can result in victimisation, discrimination and increased stigma for people living with HIV”. In reality, people living with HIV are leading prevention efforts in their communities and campaigning for change. Many of them already struggle with telling new partners about their status – particularly in heterosexual relationships, where the question is less likely to arise. Criminalisation only exacerbates this stigma and makes communication more fraught. Moral considerations aside, criminalisation simply does not reduce transmission or improve public understanding of HIV. According to the Joint United Nations programme on HIV/Aids, there is no data that shows legal penalties reduce transmission. On the contrary, there is reason to believe that it has a counterproductive impact on public health, not least because it offers a powerful disincentive to get tested. Gareth Thomas on coming out as HIV positive: ‘It was my right to tell my family – not somebody else’s’Read moreAcross the world, the criminalisation of HIV has been shown to have a disproportionate impact on the most vulnerable members of society, including racialised minorities, sex workers and women. These groups are often less empowered to negotiate safer sex, and face additional barriers to accessing HIV prevention and care. In Canada, where non-disclosure is criminalised if no condoms are used and the viral load is above a certain level, one woman was prosecuted for reckless transmission after being sexually assaulted by a group of men, while another suffered the same fate after being coerced by her male partner into having sex without a condom. When we think about HIV transmission solely in terms of individual blame, however “reckless” an individual’s actions may seem to be, we let those who are truly responsible off the hook. In December, the UK government published data that showed it is no longer on track to meet its target of ending new transmissions by 2030. What should be an achievable goal has been jeopardised by cuts to sexual health services, structural racism and a decade-long failure to ensure equitable access to treatment and prevention. As the sexual health charity the Terrence Higgins Trust said of Thomas’s case, “There are no winners when it comes to legal proceedings around HIV transmission.” The law is – at best – an unreliable tool when it comes to achieving HIV justice. To reduce HIV transmission, people must be empowered to have open and educated conversations about sexual health. Along with tools such as PrEP and testing, this is our best way of ensuring that situations such as the Thomas case become a thing of the past. James Greig is a freelance journalist Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here. Almost every day, the bulldozers are on the move. In the Palestinian neighbourhoods of Jerusalem, my city, Israeli forces are demolishing homes on an almost daily basis. Dispossession and discrimination have been a longstanding reality here in the eastern part of the city, under Israeli military occupation for 56 years, but under the new far-right Israeli government, Jerusalem has seen a spike in demolitions – more than 30 structures were destroyed in January alone. The news from our region in western capitals and media outlets tends to be dominated by bloodshed – and the Palestinian people are going through some of the most violent, destructive and lethal days in recent memory. The year 2022 was the deadliest in nearly two decades in the occupied West Bank. In January a further 31 Palestinians were killed by Israeli fire. Hopelessness, frustration and despair hover over us all like a dark cloud. But the numbers alone do not express the extent of this cruelty. Death tolls and cliched phrases in an ill-informed, biased or unquestioning media about cycles of violence are not appropriate or sufficient for relaying the power imbalance of an occupier and occupied. The violence we Palestinians are exposed to on a daily basis is not just from the Israeli army’s weapons but is also deep and structural. There are no “cycles of home demolitions” or “tit-for-tat expulsions” – Palestinians are not confiscating Israeli properties or detaining thousands of Israelis through military courts. Any approach that suggests symmetry of power – or responsibility – is analytically and morally flawed. A microcosm of this structural violence can be found right here in the city of my birth, Jerusalem. Last month, a Palestinian gunman killed seven Israelis in the Neve Yaakov settlement in occupied East Jerusalem. Israel’s minister of national security, Itamar Ben-Gvir, subsequently pledged to intensify the demolitions of Palestinian homes built without permits, framing the move as a response to the attack. Most Palestinian homes are targeted for lacking a permit; indeed, in my city, at least a third of Palestinian structures lack an Israeli-issued permit, putting 100,000 residents of occupied East Jerusalem at risk of forcible displacement at any given moment. In fact, since Israel’s occupation of East Jerusalem began in 1967, virtually no public planning was conducted at all for Palestinian neighbourhoods. Fifty-five thousand homes have been built for Jewish Israelis in the eastern part of the city, while fewer than 600 homes were built for Palestinians with any kind of government support. This policy has ensured not only poor housing for Palestinians, but also that they remain a minority in the city. Despite Palestinians comprising over 37% of Jerusalem’s residents, only 8. 5% of the land in the city is designated for their residential purposes (and even there the potential to build is restricted). Between 1991 and 2018, only 16. 5% of all housing construction permits issued by the Jerusalem municipality were for Palestinian neighbourhoods in the occupied and illegally annexed east. So-called illegal or unsanctioned construction by Palestinians is a response to the chronic, discrimination-based housing shortage. Most recently, Ben-Gvir and Jerusalem’s deputy mayor, Aryeh King, announced the imminent demolition of a residential building in Wadi Qaddum, Silwan, on the basis it was built on land designated for “sports and leisure”, rather than residential use. When it goes ahead, this will be a large-scale demolition, displacing about 100 residents. In the past 10 years alone, 1,508 Palestinian structures have been demolished in East Jerusalem, rendering 2,893 people homeless, half of whom were minors. The occupied West Bank has also been marked by a violent reality. Nearly no Palestinian construction is permitted in so-called Area C (60% of the West Bank). Israeli authorities constantly demolish Palestinian homes, roads, cisterns, solar panels and more. Settlements considered illegal under international law expand, while Palestinians are restricted to fragmented enclaves. With the number of demolitions and displacements in Jerusalem and the West Bank increasing, entire communities are under threat. But we should remember the cost is most obvious on an individual level: the one family who lose all they have in the world. Walls crumble, children cry and parents scramble to figure out what to do or where to go next. It is a catastrophe, and it is constant. Lacking an impossible-to-obtain permit is not the only context for demolishing Palestinian property; the Israeli occupation authorities are also destroying or sealing homes as a form of collective punishment, strictly prohibited under international law. Acts of forcible displacement of an occupied population constitute a war crime. The cruelty is astonishing. These demolitions and displacements are one part of the structural violence we as Palestinians face every day. This Israeli government may pursue new cruel manifestations of occupation, but the foundations were laid by successive coalitions since 1967 from Labor to Likud. That is why there is no consolation for us Palestinians in the crowds of Israelis protesting against proposed judicial reforms. For decades our lands have been confiscated and people displaced by elected Israeli politicians of various parties, rubber-stamped by every tier of the court system. Occupation and racist policies have been imposed on us by those within the current coalition – and many currently on the outside. This violence is our reality – and confronting such a reality is a necessary first step in our fight for dignity and justice. Blaming the victim or shutting down the conversation will only prolong our suffering. It’s not a cycle of violence, it’s a system of apartheid – and must be treated as such by the outside world. Jalal Abukhater is a writer from JerusalemDo you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here. “This soul-searching has not been easy,” she writes. But though she looked everywhere, Liz Truss never found it. Instead, she found blame to scatter on everyone but herself for the havoc left by her 49 days: even ChatGPT would have written her 4,000-word non-apologia with more humanity and humility. Truss’s attempt at resurrection would be easily dismissed, except that her hallucinations are rampant across her party: ideas not cauterised by searing confrontation with reality. Though Truss was outlasted by a lettuce, let’s reprise how she did such damage in so short a time: her mini-budget was more of a mini H-bomb. Within hours the pound plummeted and borrowing costs soared. When her chancellor proclaimed more was to come, gilt markets plunged and the Bank of England rushed in with a monster £65bn bailout. That has left some highly exposed defined benefit pensions missing billions and people with mortgages paying the price. The country still suffers her “moron premium”: it is less trusted to borrow and so obliged to pay more, says Prof David Blanchflower, a former member of the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee. “She has exposed the UK economy as knife-edge fragile,” he tells me. “And she made it worse with what she has written.” That’s because, unrepentant, she exposes the core beliefs of a party where many are all too eager to try her killer recipe again. Liz Truss says she didn’t get ‘realistic chance’ to enact tax-cutting agendaRead moreThe failure of her real-life experiment has left many as convinced as ever of the theory. Plenty in her party agree that she was essentially right, she just didn’t roll the pitch. They cling to their theoretical Laffer curve, claiming tax cuts for the rich yield more tax to the exchequer, though as Blanchflower says, “Trump disproved it definitively. His $2tn tax cuts for the rich left $2tn of debts.”The head-on smash when ideology confronts the real world seems to have left Truss and her party concussed but undeterred. Hers was the latest of three lethal economic experiments. Austerity came first, George Osborne cutting back to a smaller government during a recession, when every economic precedent said it was a time to invest, so UK growth lagged behind. Then came Brexit, its high price to be paid for years to come. And now, this Trussonomics crash. Free markets, that was the mantra of the contributors to Britannia Unchained, the 2012 Truss, Kwasi Kwarteng, Dominic Raab, Chris Skidmore and Priti Patel manifesto for Singapore-on-Thames Toryism. Yet those free markets brought her down, not her imaginary “leftwing economic establishment”. The hedge-funder Crispin Odey, a Brexiteer and Tory donor, who made another fortune betting on Truss trashing the pound and bonds, is the market personified: the brute force of money trumps ideology every time. Bleating that no one warned her of the risk to bond markets as she borrowed billions to give the well-off a tax cut, it was she who had had enough of experts; she who fired Tom Scholar, head of the Treasury; she who threatened the governor of the Bank of England, questioning the institution’s remit; and barred the Office for Budget Responsibility from alerting her to exactly this kind of blunder. She writes: “Even though the measure was economically sound, I underestimated the political backlash I would face, which focused almost entirely on the ‘optics’.” The optics? No, reality brought her down. Most Tories seem none the wiser, as the jittery factions fight it out, ready to back that magic cuts formula again if May’s local elections are half as bad as they fear. Truss has few personal adherents, but she is the party’s standard-bearer for low taxes. The other resentful ex-PM echoes her themes, telling Nadine Dorries that cutting tax “needs to happen”, helping the “Bring back Boris, he did nothing wrong” grumbling groundswell. Suella Braverman, with her old-school rightist faction, is of that ilk; no contender is too improbable after Truss. But they have lost public trust on the economy, and whenever Truss speaks she will remind voters of who really chose her as prime minister, what she did and the small state ideal they still cleave to. Liz Truss seems keen to make comeback, but is anyone else on board?Read moreAnd look at their so-called “sensibles”. Up pops BlackRock’s Rupert Harrison, an architect of Osborne’s austerity which knocked the UK economy back behind most of the EU. He tweets patronisingly that Truss got things in the wrong order: tax cuts should only come after “public sector reform and a sustainably smaller state”. The destination is the same, on the same Truss spectrum of delusion, along with their supporters in the press. The Sunday Telegraph leader says: “The statist Tory establishment has had its turn and the party is cratering in the polls; the free-marketeers must now speak up.” The Mail leader says: “The ideas she stands for may be due for serious re-examination.” Tory thinktanks, funded by God knows who, swirl with this “solution” to the party’s directionless drifting. But their great omertà, what they never dare reveal, is what “small government” and “deregulation” mean and how on earth they could ever turn it into an even faintly palatable election platform. When ambulances no longer turn up to save Grandma and mothers give up work for lack of childcare, when pay for nurses and teachers is falling, while energy bills are due to shoot up again and no one can see any difference when the railways are on strike, “small state” looks a formidably hard sell. They never say what, exactly, they mean to cut, shrink or deregulate. This is their addictive elixir to revive flagging spirits when all else looks lost, though it’s a sure-fire loser. Incidentally, observers puzzled by the Truss phenomenon may like to check the Dunning-Kruger effect: “Unskilled and unaware of it: how difficulties in recognising one’s own incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments.” Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist I came to London more than 30 years ago to protest against the vicious murder of 15-year-old Rolan Adams. He and his younger brother were waiting at a bus stop when they were chased by a gang of white teenagers, many yelling racial epithets. Adams was stabbed in the neck with a butterfly knife and died. The white mobs here were eerily similar to the white mobs we witnessed while protesting in places like Bensonhurst, Brooklyn. Similar stares, similar hate, similar use of the “N-word”, similar unease, similar tension and a similar lack of justice. More than three decades later, I return to share my film, Loudmouth, which chronicles my lifelong journey advocating and fighting for civil rights. While there has been progress that I have witnessed first-hand, both the US and the UK are still dealing with an excessive amount of police brutality. Whether it is back home or across the pond, the need for effective, thorough police reform is long overdue and we are here to demand it in unison. Rolan Adams, who was murdered in 1991, and his father. Photograph: HandoutAs I left the US, my thoughts were still with the family of Tyre Nichols, a 29-year-old Black man who was beaten to death by officers according to videotape footage. I delivered the eulogy at his funeral and stood alongside his grieving mother, stepfather and loved ones. The pain that they will carry for the rest of their lives is just like the grief and agony that every family member of victims of police brutality endures whether in the US, the UK or elsewhere. Back home, there is case after case of officers killing unarmed Black and Brown folks in disproportionate numbers, as well as profiling, arresting, incarcerating and just plain targeting them. In the Nichols case, the accused officers are Black. This abuse is a systemic problem, just as it is a systemic problem in the UK. Last September, the Metropolitan police shot and killed unarmed 24-year-old Chris Kaba. Police followed his vehicle and Kaba died from a single shot by an officer, according to reports. He was about to become a father. His family, members of the community, activists and even some politicians have called for accountability in the case. Similar to protests in the US, many on the ground in the UK have led rallies for reform. The Independent Office for Police Conduct said that it is conducting an investigation, but it may take anywhere from six to nine months. That is simply too long. This heartbroken family must receive answers and justice. The problems with policing, whether here or in the states, often begin with dehumanising and devaluing Black and Brown lives. At an early age, our children are criminalised, perceived to be older than their age and treated harshly and unfairly. We saw that in the UK in a case in 2020 that garnered international outrage when a 15-year-old Black girl was strip-searched by female officers without the presence of her parents or another adult. The young girl was taken to the school’s medical room and strip-searched (while she was menstruating) by officers reportedly looking for cannabis. No drugs were found. This was not an isolated incident. According to the children’s commissioner for England, 650 children were strip-searched by police in London from 2018-2020. The majority were boys, and about 58% were Black. Simply unacceptable. Al Sharpton delivers a eulogy for Tyre Nichols. Photograph: Getty ImagesImpacts from systemic racism and a police culture that does not view us as deserving of basic human rights has detrimental reverberations. In June 2020, two sisters, Nicole Smallman and Bibaa Henry, were murdered and their bodies discovered in a park. Two Met police officers took pictures of their bodies, circulated them to others and made crass comments. The family also learned that a missing person log was incorrectly closed, and police failed to take any real action on the day the young women went missing. Not only was this gross negligence, but it again highlights the lack of care, respect and treatment that our communities receive. Those officers may not have killed them, but they caused further harm by their utter disregard and reprehensible behaviour. I’m tired of watching Black men like Tyre Nichols die. This shouldn’t be normal | Tayo BeroRead moreThese are just a few of the cases in recent years that have rocked neighbourhoods and communities in the UK, along with many others. It is similar to the pattern and practice misconduct we have been dealing with in the US for years and years. That’s the bad news. There is, however, a glimmer of hope and some good news. Many who’ve fought for justice in the UK are having their voices heard. Stephen Lawrence’s mother, Doreen, is a respected peer. Simon Woolley, the activist I came to protest with in 1991, is now Lord Simon Woolley and the principal of Homerton College, Cambridge. In the US, we elected our first Black president, Barack Obama, and now our first Black vice-president, Kamala Harris, who just gave a moving statement at Tyre Nichols’s funeral. So yes, we have gained, but many things sadly remain the same. We have gained because it has not been in vain. The struggle continues as we fight for civil rights, police reform, equal treatment and justice. After all, whether in the US, the UK or around the world, none of us are free, until we are all free. Rev Al Sharpton is an American Baptist minister, civil rights activist and radio talkshow host We have now heard for the first time from David Carrick’s victims – the women a serving Met police officer raped, controlled, threatened and abused. Their victim statements, read out by prosecutor Tom Little during Carrick’s sentencing hearing on Monday, painted a picture of terror, violence and control; of being made to feel “worthless”, “degraded”, “ashamed”, “like a piece of dirt on his shoe”.I hope that Carrick’s sentencing for his 49 offences will bring some sense of closure to his victims. But it should offer no sense of an ending to the Metropolitan police. Because a running thread in the victims’ statements was Carrick’s job. He was not just a police officer who happened to be a rapist – he used his badge, his status, and even his police firearm to threaten and coerce women. “Every time I see a police car,” one victim said, “I freeze and hold my breath.” The Met failed to properly vet Carrick, and failed to take action following eight complaints about his conduct with women. More than 30 years ago, I voiced my own experiences as a female detective chief inspector (DCI) to the writer Lynda La Plante, to inform her groundbreaking TV drama, Prime Suspect, and its lead character, DCI Jane Tennison (played by Helen Mirren). I recounted the bigotry of an institution dominated by white men, and the impact it had on the way police forces investigated crimes, based on lazy assumptions about victims of sexual assaults and domestic violence. The show’s transmission led to a flurry of debate about the cult of masculinity within policing. Helen Mirren in Prime Suspect. Photograph: ITV/Rex/ShutterstockOn some fronts, huge progress has been made since that time: I was one of only three female DCIs in the Met when I first began working as a consultant on Prime Suspect, and all chief constables in the country were male. Now, many of them are women. Yet despite the changed leadership profile and greater societal repudiation of discrimination, it appears that a toxic culture of misogyny and racism still pervades in some parts of the organisation. Collective jaws dropped to the floor in 2021 when the then serving officer Wayne Couzens was found to be the man responsible for the abduction, rape and murder of Sarah Everard. Then there was evidence of deeply disturbing misogynist and racist views in some pockets of the Met. And there is clearly more bad news to come. The Met is in the process of reviewing 1,633 cases of domestic violence or sexual abuse, relating to accusations levelled against 1,071 officers and police staff over the last decade, to check the appropriate decisions were made. A new hotline for the public, set up by the Met, is generating new cases – some relating to police officers in other forces. Met commissioner Mark Rowley has already warned of “more painful stories” ahead. When it comes to turning the culture around, it is vital that officers are able to speak up about concerns they may have about colleagues – yet this is difficult in a job where a strong team spirit is integral, and where any raising of issues risks being seen as “letting the side down”. I speak from experience. In the mid-1980s, I endured a harrowing year after reporting the concerns of “Stella”, a colleague who suspected someone higher up the ranks of wrongdoing. The officer in charge of our station was furious that I had reported it through the appropriate channels, rather than keeping it in-house. It wasn’t only his wrath that I had to contend with, but also that of colleagues. Word soon got around that “Stella” and I had reported one of “our own”. A group of officers manifested their disgust by standing up and walking out when I went to get a cup of tea in the canteen. I was told of graffiti in the men’s toilets about my sexuality, and – in what seemed unlikely to be a coincidence – appalling porn was pushed through my letter box at home at midnight. “Stella” had it no easier, with excrement smeared on her car handle and her tyres deflated. When she moved on to a new station, she was told there was a “trust” issue as a result of her reporting on a senior colleague – even though she had been proved to be right. Should she ever need “urgent assistance” on the streets, she was told, none would be forthcoming. David Carrick sent victim photo of gun and told her: ‘I am the boss,’ court toldRead moreThis occurred almost 40 years ago but it seems that on this front, not enough has changed, as an October 2022 interim report into the culture and standards at the Met by Louise Casey recently laid bare. “Too often”, said the report, people who had reported wrongdoing said that they found the system “stacked against them”. Many officers and staff said that they were made to feel as if they were the problem for speaking up. “We heard that supervisors and managers are actively dissuading their staff from reporting misconduct,” the report continued. A police officer has told Sky News that she, too, was raped by Carrick, but didn’t report it because it would have been “the end of my career”; that colleagues would have “laughed” in response. After Casey’s report came out, Rowley vowed to root out racist and misogynist behaviour in the Met; leaders who turn a blind eye, he said, are “as guilty as the offender”. He is right. Ultimately, nothing will change until leaders right across the organisation make raising concern about colleagues a less punitive and lonely experience. Elsewhere, reviews triggered by ministers are under way around vetting, disciplinaries and dismissals. All eyes are now on Rowley, with much at stake: without the public’s engagement, police officers will struggle to do their job, and our streets will be less safe. Added to that, we risk losing talented police officers who are fed up with being tarred with the same brush. There’s no way round the fact that meaningful change in an organisation as vast as the Met will take time. Rowley has already warned that kicking out those not fit to wear the uniform won’t be a speedy affair, and it is likely to be a painful one too. To get on with the job, he needs to be free of the usual kneejerk expectation from politicians in search of quick results. Patience is the order of the day. As told to Hélène Mulholland. Jackie Malton is a former senior police officer who inspired the character of DCI Jane Tennison in Prime Suspect. She is the author, with Hélène Mulholland, of The Real Prime Suspect: from the beat to the screen Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here. Liz Truss is now eluded by two major types of growth: economic and personal. The past few days have seen the former prime minister break her welcome silence with what her allies call a series of “interventions”. The one intervention that doesn’t seem to have happened is the type where they sit you down and give you the hard truths about your behaviour. That treatment oversight has resulted in a spectacle of lavishly preposterous blame-shifting and self-delusion. As discussed here recently, both the previous two prime ministers – Truss and Boris Johnson – are at this game. We live in an era where people who have got all the way to the highest office in the land now hilariously claim structural discrimination against the fact that, after varying amounts of time, they just weren’t good enough. When both of these chancers left office, they had not simply passed their best-before date – they had sailed beyond the use-by date and moved formally into the realms of biohazard. Yet instead of bucking the f up and accepting this, they have turned into the political equivalent of “incels” – involuntarily rejected by the people who determine whether or not you get to be prime minister, and bleating about it in self-reflection-free style on every available forum.“Was it the right decision?” Truss mused of aspects of her mini-budget in yesterday’s interview with the Spectator. “It’s very hard to tell.” To which the only conceivably sane reply must be: no it isn’t. NO IT ISN’T! This financial event resulted in sterling shitting the bed, complete turmoil on the bond markets, central bank intervention, mortgages going up, and the seriously perilous possibility that the UK would have to default on its debt. Amazingly, those hints appear to have been too subtle. Or as Liz puts it: “You never know what the counterfactual looks like.” Again: yes you do?! It looks like these things not happening because of the things you did. The way she tells it, Truss has spent the past three months “trying to work out what happened” during her straight-to-meme time in No 10. She has now left her yarn-cobwebbed investigation wall to report the results back to the general public. Verdict: “I didn’t get everything right.” I mean … ya think? Arguably there was the odd flaw to the shortest premiership in British political history – and that includes the early 19th century guy who snuffed it with tuberculosis. But it seems that our flaws are the things that make us beautiful. Lettuces don’t actually rot – they just achieve their final form.“I assumed on entering Downing Street that my mandate would be respected,” Truss now explains. “How wrong I was.” Is this the mandate from 81,000 serially wrong idiots? Righto. Perhaps the clue was in the process all along. You may have noted reports that the 1922 Committee is considering changing the rules so that a leadership challenge to Rishi Sunak could occur after May’s local elections, perhaps with a view to fulfilling the prophecy that in the future, every Tory MP will be prime minister for 15 minutes. In the meantime, further eye-popping rebrands to the destruction wrought by Truss and her robot sidekick Kwasi Kwarteng are being attempted. The financial meltdown that was demonstrably caused by her own mini-budget has been firmly pinned on others. In Truss’s head, it is now something called “the LDI crisis”, named after the liability-driven investments somehow no one had warned her about, even though most of her lengthy Sunday Telegraph article and Spectator interview were spent apportioning blame to anyone in British economic life who might have served a warning function. Liz Truss in her Spectator TV interview Photograph: Spectator TVThese include, but are not limited to: the Treasury, the Office for Budget Responsibility, and, ultimately, those mad lefties in the global financial markets. All of these many and varied entities had their warnings branded by Truss as “resistance”, or simply as the more shadowy “forces”. Even the free markets, whose wisdom Truss had spent a career touting as the perfect mechanism for arbitrating on pretty much everything, turn out to have suffered from an unforgivable lack of imagination as far as her policies were concerned. In many ways she was just a girl, standing in front of the free markets, asking them to love her. They couldn’t. Still, maybe she can change them. The ‘leftwing economic establishment’ did not bring Liz Truss down. Reality did | Polly ToynbeeRead moreWherever you stand on the answers to the UK’s spectacularly poorly managed decline, it is difficult not to be struck by the sheer nonsense victimhood of it all. For someone who has long cast herself as the implacable enemy of woke culture and snowflakes and all that jazz, Truss presents herself as the ultimate injured party. Perhaps there were hints of this in the leadership contest last summer, where her team decided to accuse Rishi Sunak of “mansplaining” for talking about the realities of the economy. This ludicrous notion that the world is stacked against the actual prime minister is now routinely said out loud by people who landed the biggest possible job and don’t believe in a single other type of structural discrimination. I appreciate that another column merely adds to the pile, but already huge amounts of airtime have been spent engaging with Truss’s hyper-elite victimhood, just as huge amounts of airtime will soon be spent again engaging with the wildly miscast victimhood of Boris Johnson once the standards committee investigation into one fraction of his endless lies gets publicly under way. The country is in a toxic relationship with a number of our prime ministerial exes; terminating contact must be the first step. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist Fifty-one minutes. It’s too long for a meeting, close to perfect for an album, and a solid result for a 10km run – but a date? You can only hope that it’s not a personal best. A new study suggests that 51 minutes is all the average person can manage of a date that has started to go downhill. The survey of 2,000 adults (carried out by the breakdown provider Britannia Rescue – used to facilitating hasty getaways, I suppose) found that a fifth had departed a date midway through, with commonly used exit strategies including sudden headaches and getting a friend to fake an emergency. Personally, I tend to have the opposite problem: my dates start at a respectable 7pm and end, much less respectably, at midnight or later, as I try to figure out whether we are compatible by way of several pints and sheer willpower. Try as I might to occupy a relaxed middle ground, I seem incapable of approaching dating with any other attitude than “go big or go home”. Part of my difficulty is that my “openness to experience” – a trait said to be prized among my millennial generation – means that I am highly motivated to see through situations that might fairly be deemed subpar. Where others may be making their excuses at the 51-minute mark, I have waited almost as long for my date to ask me a question. It’s not desperation or politeness that keeps me stuck in my seat and ordering another round; more a pathological curiosity to see what happens. You always have to have hope, of course – but as soon as that’s been dispelled, why stick around? For that reason, I am cheering on those daters who who can leg it for the exit within the hour. Dating has changed a lot since the pandemic, in some ways for the better. After many apps expanded their functionality through lockdown, more people now feel open to arranging a preliminary phone chat or video call before meeting in person: they are often as effective a way of gauging initial interest, and much more convenient. Likewise, sober dating is on the rise. It is much harder to look past a lack of chemistry at a cafe or museum, and easier to make your escape. (Leaving after one latte is more than generous with your time. Leaving after one pint? Unforgivably brusque.)The top reasons given by the Britannia survey respondents for wanting to make a quick getaway were a date who was rude (48%), constantly checking their phone (37%), or creating an awkward atmosphere (36%): more than reason enough to call it quits, I’d argue, especially when there are so many other things we could or should be doing. Ultimately, seriously searching for love takes time and money, and many of us are finding ourselves increasingly short on both. It’s no wonder that a potentially good but more likely mediocre meeting with a stranger might hold less appeal than 51 more minutes of sleep and £51 more in your bank account. Tellingly, “dating-app fatigue” is on the rise, with many likening it to admin. It’s not only time that is the relevant concern here. In Hanging Out: The Radical Power of Killing Time, academic Sheila Liming argues that our relationships also need space if they are to reveal themselves fully and extend a reward. No one benefits from someone enduring, to the bitter end, a date that they don’t want to be on. But I sometimes wonder if, more often than not, we might not be giving ourselves a chance to enjoy it.‘You have to set time aside for friendship’: the radical power of hanging outRead moreThe Britannia survey, sure enough, found that 44% of those polled reached for excuses such as feeling unwell, a work deadline or broken-down car to get out of going on a date at all. The more theatrical claim to have been mugged. You can’t help but think that those imaginative powers might have been put to better use picturing how the date might actually go well. (Manifesting, I believe gen Z call it. Hey, I’ll try anything.)Certainly Logan Ury, a behavioural scientist and the dating app Hinge’s director of relationship science, advises always agreeing to a second date (unless the first was truly atrocious), for a chance to see beyond the nervous butterflies – but even two meetings are a small window on a whole person. I often think back to the beginnings of my closest friendships. I would never have dreamed that I’d have a complete grasp on their character after one or two meetings, and I’m forever grateful that they extended me the same courtesy. Yet it’s standard practice to make a call on a date, even long-term compatibility, after less than a day’s investigation. Sometimes, of course, it is immediately clear – in which case few would blame you for crying “pet healthcare crisis” or suddenly remembering that there’s somewhere you need to be. But it’s a reminder to be open to possibility, to being surprised and potentially swept off your feet. After all, you are never less likely to lose track of time than when you’re watching the clock. Elle Hunt is a freelance journalist The sentencing of David Carrick and the dreadful details we have heard of what he did and how his victims suffered forms part of a long line of awful events that strike at the heart of policing today. I wish I could say that I was surprised but I cannot. Aside from him being an abhorrent individual, the reason he got away with his crimes runs deep in a culture that has been in need of reform for a long time. And those at the top know this. I have throughout my policing career extolled the virtues of the UK policing model, but in the latter stages of that career, I became increasingly concerned at the inability of the service to adapt and ensure that it responded as society changed. You can change the rules in which a force operates, you can change legislation, add new laws, appoint new chiefs, change discipline arrangements, but in essence, there has been little or no success in changing policing culture, identifying the good bits, dealing with the bad. I recall as a young constable travelling to take my exam as part of the promotion process to sergeant: arguably the most important rank in the service. At the centre there were officers from numerous other forces. A group from one force grabbed my attention. I didn’t hear them being racist, but it was obvious to me that their culture was old and stale and not in keeping with what I thought policing was about. And as a new officer with less than two years service, if I knew this, many others of rank must have known or at worst shared the culture. Some of them are likely to be chiefs now. I recall being told by one superintendent after another failed shortlisting attempt for promotion that as long as I could not learn to keep my mouth shut, I would not get promoted. Keeping my mouth shut about things that were wrong has never been my strong point. So I find it a bit shocking that we have chiefs and crime commissioners reacting as though they had no idea about poor policing culture. They do, they just haven’t tackled it. Being an officer is described as “the job”. It’s a close-knit, often closed-knit, culture, some of which is good and understandable, some of which, however, is negative. As chair of the Police Federation of England and Wales, I was all about reform, but you were not likely to hear me extolling the virtues of external help in dealing with policing’s problems. I would have been vilified. No longer tied by organisational pressure and allegiances – and perhaps with more wisdom – my view has changed. As the detective who inspired TV’s Prime Suspect, I know this: the misogyny of David Carrick lives on | Jackie Malton Read moreI certainly don’t believe that UK policing is defined by bad actors. It remains one of the best in the world. But it must now work on transforming its culture. It needs to learn lessons from other organisations where the culture has changed, been nurtured and improved. It needs to be less proud about fixing itself and ask for help. And it needs to do it as a whole, not with 43 different forces doing it in 43 different ways. How far can an organisation go if it simply just keeps apologising for past individuals and carries on in essentially the same way?The question of whether the Metropolitan police can survive needs close examination. Is it tainted beyond redemption? Perhaps it is. Policing must continue in the capital, but does it have to be under the “Met”? I don’t think it does or can, and while policing culture both good and bad exists across every force, there has thus far been little evidence that policing in the capital will do enough voluntarily (despite the positive efforts of the new commissioner, Mark Rowley) to rebuild the public trust. If our model of policing by consent is to survive, that public trust must be high. That trust lies in the action and culture of policing in our neighbourhoods, not in the ivory towers of seniority. Basic command units, or divisions, are the key and with these, the size, name and hierarchy above them is to an extent irrelevant. But whatever higher structure exists must be focused on reform and enabling a strong ethical culture that is embedded in the belief that policing is about making people’s lives better. So, I don’t believe it is inevitable that the Met must remain; or that the 43 forces should do so either. We need a radical overhaul of structure, leadership, values and expectations. For years I have been an advocate of a royal commission into policing, and for years every government has resisted this, but I see no other way to get the service to change. We should start thinking what some believe is unthinkable and undoable. The disbanding of the Met. It is doable. On a recent visit to Argentina I saw first-hand how policing in Buenos Aires had been changed recently beyond all recognition. The service in Northern Ireland is another example to a degree. With a quick and detailed examination of the cultural and structural issues by a commission, along with quick and perhaps painful implementation, the service can rebuild the public trust which is inherently needed for our model to succeed. But I fear that despite today, despite Carrick and all the other scandals, the senior echelons of policing will remain in denial and the political drive to change that will be absent. Culture change takes huge effort and time, and policing has always been too concerned with short-termism. It takes a strong individual to commit to the long haul, but it must happen. New thinking and a new Met are needed now, before it is too late. Steve White is a former chair of the Police Federation of England and Wales and former acting police and crime commissioner for Durham As the government lurches between screw-ups, sleaze and scandals, it is ironic that one of its key policy agendas is based on the premise that the rest of us aren’t working properly. The chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, has highlighted the “economically inactive” as a key issue facing the UK. The number of working-age people either unable or unwilling to take a job has increased by about 630,000 since 2019, according to government estimates, resulting in a staggering 9 million people missing from the job market. Broadly, Hunt is concerned about two camps: the over-50s who took early retirement during the pandemic, and the increasing number of people who can’t work because of long-term health conditions and disabilities – a state of affairs put down to factors ranging from soaring NHS waiting lists to long Covid. Hunt’s strategies to bring the two groups back into the workforce, however, are stark in their differences. Ministers are reportedly looking into a “midlife MOT” to coax older workers back to at least part-time roles, including financial incentives and mentoring schemes. The Treasury is also reportedly considering exempting over-50s who return to work from income tax for up to a year. Contrast this with their tactics towards people who are off work through no choice of their own due to illness or disability. The government is obliging 600,000 claimants on universal credit to meet a “work coach” so they can increase their hours or earnings, even though many will have health problems or caring responsibilities. Meanwhile, ministers are said to be planning to target the partners of people on benefits to push them into paid work. Stay-at-home mums whose partners receive universal credit could be “blitzed” with an ad campaign to get them into the labour market. Middle-class mums, presumably, will be permitted to stay at home. Then there’s the new anti-fraud drive. Just as long-term sickness shot up, the government announced £280m of fresh investment to “crack down” on benefit fraud and errors for the next two years – despite that accounting for just 4% of total benefit expenditure last year. If you’re off work because you’re spending more time on the golf course, you could get tax breaks. If you left your job because you were diagnosed with Parkinson’s, you may get a call from the fraud squad. The government is trying a carrot and stick approach to fix the labour gap, except the over-50s get the carrot and the long-term sick get the stick. Reports in the Sunday Times about the upcoming review by the work and pensions secretary, Mel Stride, into the labour market gap suggests more progressive measures to help ill and disabled claimants may yet to be unveiled. These range from cash for occupational health assessments and flexible home working, to enabling those who are able to return to at least part-time work to still receive sickness benefits. These have the potential to be genuinely helpful policies. That ministers are also said to be considering bolstering the sanctions regime and requiring some long-term sick people to meet work coaches more regularly, however, is a worrying sign of their true agenda. This is in part a story of intergenerational inequality, where the boomer generation can afford to retire early with paid-off mortgages while their children struggle to afford the rent. But it is largely one of class and health, in which those with the means are seen by those in power as “contributors” offered rewards to return to work, while those without are “takers” penalised for being unable to. Just look at the way the rightwing press has been reporting on the issue. The Sun’s report gleefully described the government’s plan to get mums back into the workforce as a way to “drag them off benefits”. The Mail screams of an “epidemic of inactivity”. The Spectator, meanwhile, claims to have “proof” that more than 5 million people are now on out-of-work benefits, as if there are hordes of claimants hiding under official figures. Whether it is ministers or the press, the implication of such rhetoric is clear: being too ill to work is a lifestyle choice. Want to know the depth of our NHS crisis? Then talk to disabled people needing day-to-day care | Frances RyanRead moreIn the past few years, as the Tories have focused on the spectacle of Brexit and culture wars, the anti-“welfare” strategy that dominated the early 2010s under David Cameron has been noticeably quieter. But the increasing hardship of the cost of living crisis, coupled with the implosion of support for the Conservative party in the polls, offers a chance to bring it back to the foreground. At a time when many workers can’t afford to put the heating on, it is fertile ground for convincing voters that the work-shy sick are scamming the system. A government that was genuine about closing the labour gap would actually address the reasons for it. That means providing NHS and social care investment, affordable childcare, tackling disability prejudice from employers, and acknowledging that Brexit robbed us of migrant’s talents. Research by the Institute for Fiscal Studies published last week showed that successive waves of welfare changes have trapped people in dead-end low-paid work, with many still needing top-up benefits to survive. This just shows how self-defeating a drive to get claimants back to work at any cost can be. Instead of fearing excess claims for disability benefits, the government could start by recognising that a decade of tightening eligibility for out-of-work sickness benefits, on top of cuts to rates, means disabled people are actually far more likely to be incorrectly found “fit for work” than awarded benefits they don’t need. The tragedy is, this would involve an intellect and morality current ministers are severely lacking. Scapegoating the sick is altogether easier. Frances Ryan is a Guardian columnist I’ve had a disaster since my last column. I was driving back from work one evening in December when a car veered on to my side of the road on a bend. I went off the road straight into a tree. Luckily, I was only going at about 10 mph and, though my little Kia was written off, I was physically OK. If I’d been driving any faster I would have gone over the edge with a 20ft drop on the other side. No car means no work. I had to scrape together £750 to get myself a new motor. The only reason I managed was that I’d just taken out a £600 social fund budgeting loan from the government, which is available to me because I’m on employment and support allowance. That 600 quid was going to help me through Christmas – ask anyone struggling financially and they’ll tell you how tough that time of year is, and it’s much harder as a single parent like me. In the end, the £66 from the energy bills support scheme enabled me to put enough bits and bobs away to buy the kids presents. Cars loomed large again. My son got a remote control car. I gave my daughter a £50 New Look voucher to get herself some new clothes. I was disgusted when I went to get my energy grant, though. While people who are billed for their electricity (generally, people who are better off) get the £66 a month automatically, those of us on prepayment meters have to apply for it. It’s not even been well promoted, so loads of poorer people on meters haven’t applied, and it’s going unclaimed. Those of us on prepayment meters usually pay for our electricity at a higher rate too. Yet again the government has rigged things in favour of people who are better off. When you’re down is when you get to see who your true friends are. A few weeks ago I shared with others how difficult things were for me and the kids. It’s the first time I’ve gone public about it. I wasn’t asking for or expecting anything, but the response was amazing. Before I knew it, there were parcels left on my doorstep. Bernadette, the mum of one of my daughter’s friends who works for the NHS, sent round a whole lot of stuff – sweets, chocolate, crisps, slices of meat, dips, Dreamies for the cat. I was so touched. I bought my sick dad some heated leggings that you charge up on a USB – all my energy is spent keeping him warm | SiobhanRead moreWhen you’re struggling is also when you get to see that some friends aren’t quite as true as you’d thought. Take Danny, who I’ve been mates with for years. He recently said he wanted to ask me something, but he was embarrassed about it. I told him we were close enough for him to ask me anything. He muttered something about wanting me to do something for him, and that there’d be money in it for me that could help the kids. The next thing I knew he’d sent me a photo of his naked arse, with an angry red whip mark slashed across it. Yep, that’s right, he wanted me to be his dominatrix. I was offended on three fronts. First, Danny knew so little about me that he thought I’d do it. Second, that he would take advantage of my situation to ask me. Third, his bare-faced cheek at sending me the photo of said arse. I told him I thought that would be crossing a line and it’s a line I don’t want to cross with him, or anyone else for that matter. Actually, in the end I told him to get lost. So it looks as though my friend Danny is now my ex-friend. Meanwhile, Bernadette, who I barely knew, has shown that she truly is a friend. As told to Simon Hattenstone. Liz is in her 40s and lives in the south-west of England. Names have been changed Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here. I don’t see being autistic as “having” a disorder. Instead, I look at it as a very positive thing. From a young age, it has helped me direct a laser-like focus on achieving my goals. My obsessive mindset and lack of real motivation to socialise accelerated my career in a way that would not have been possible if I had other interests. Achieving my ambitions would have been so much harder if I had not been autistic. But there is an increasing tendency to use language that demonises this neurological difference. Phrases such as “Nick has autism” or “Nick’s autism” make me cringe as they suggest an ailment that controls and burdens, which feeds into a narrative of struggle, disability and a lack of agency. Others may feel differently. We are not a homogeneous group, and I recognise a lot of autistic people, particularly the non-verbal community, may have a different lived experience. Learning difficulties and other comorbidities can add an extra complication. But for me there are plenty of positives associated with being autistic, which is why language is so important. Detail is at the heart of my autistic experience. Pinpointing, examining and finessing brings me the most extraordinary satisfaction, and these traits are, of course, highly useful in the workplace. Unlike many neurotypical people, I feel the most stress when not working. Work offers me structure, routine, order and motivation that helps me thrive and channels my busy mind, which also happens to make me a highly productive member of society. That’s not to say it is always easy being autistic. At home, I can struggle to contain my emotions, and my partner has to deal with the worst of me. I experience meltdowns when there are communication challenges, unexpected noises or day-to-day tasks that I just can’t complete. I find household chores such as washing and cleaning more overwhelming than the average person. Getting stuck in traffic or just knocking my knee on the side of the bed can be the start of a downward spiral. Being autistic can be disabling, but changing the way we talk about neurodivergence can inspire confidence. “Being autistic” rather than “having autism” promotes the idea of difference, rather than disability. You can be diagnosed “as autistic” without needing to use the word autism at all, in my view. I’m done saying sorry for being deaf – I want to change how society treats people like me | Liam O’DellRead moreOne in five of us has a difference in brain function. This includes those who are autistic, dyslexic, dyspraxic, have ADHD or another form of neurodiversity. Despite this, we are routinely excluded from society. Neurodivergent people are more likely to be unemployed than the neurotypical – and autistic people have one of the lowest rates of employment. As Britain focuses on growing its economy, I see a huge section of the workforce being underutilised and undervalued. With the right support, far more neurodivergent people could enter employment and help this country thrive. It feels more urgent than ever to start highlighting the strengths of neurodiversity, rather than always focusing on people’s difficulties. The challenge is not insurmountable. It relies on us as a country learning to treat neurodiversity with more positivity – that means being intentional with our language, and how we present autism and other neurodivergent conditions in the media. It relies on us being more accommodating in corporate settings. Companies must recognise diversity, in all its shapes and forms, as a vital way of bringing a new perspective – the spark we all need in our businesses. More conversations about neurodiversity are already being had. Now we need more research, training and awareness. And as we look to the future, I hope we will continue to strive for better. Nick Ransom is a journalist and founder of the Neurodiverse Media Community Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here. Our son was born a week ago. It’s brilliant, everything is fine, but there are new pressures now. Before his birth, we received a one-off payment of £300 which was amazing. We bought baby clothes, nappies, baby wash, equipment. Now it’s all spent, and we are living on our weekly allowance of £41 with an extra £5 for our son. It’s not enough. A pack of 24 nappies is gone in five days! Formula milk is so expensive I could hardly believe it. My wife is breastfeeding but our son is tiny – 2. 5kg – and needs to grow so he is bottle-fed too. My wife needs enough to eat to stay nourished. I’d like to buy a softer mattress for my baby’s cot. He’ll need new clothes as he gets bigger. Then there is all the travel back and forth to hospital. In times like this, to be honest, you are tempted to work illegally. There are so many companies looking for drivers, there’s a demand for key workers, there are so many jobs. The cost of living is crazy. Asylum seekers are not allowed to work and yet we’re not given the tools to survive either, and we can’t provide for our family’s needs. One of our biggest concerns with this new government is that the issue of asylum seekers is always on the news and seems entirely focused on those people crossing the Channel on boats. There is never any sense that there are so many different stories, different people from different places who did not enter Britain illegally but came here because they were in fear for their lives and desperate enough to leave their country and to trust the system. We are not the enemy. We might even help if we could be given a chance. After a year of waiting, our asylum application has been refused – I will appeal, but still can’t work | Paul Read moreI won’t take a job, of course. I’m totally clear that it’s not the way. The basis of good relations between humans must be trust and respect, so I don’t want to break the law. Now my son is here, although he’s only a baby, I’m already thinking about what I want to show him, what I want to teach him, and I want him to know that I did the right thing. We’re thankful that the food bank where I volunteer has helped us. If we receive three tins of beans, that’s three meals covered. A big roll of tissue from them is another thing that we don’t need to pay for. I try not to use the food bank unless we really need it, but I think we can only manage one or two more weeks without asking for more help. People will probably ask why we had a baby at this time. I’m in my 30s, I’m very happy with my wife, but we always wanted a family. The process of seeking asylum has been so, so slow – more than a year for a decision and now another wait for our appeal to be heard with no idea when it will be. How long can we stop our life and put everything on hold? Giving your child a good life isn’t only about buying the best toys, or what you can pay for. It’s also about teaching your kids, respecting others, helping others. It’s not going to be easy, but I’m going to do my best to give him a good life and help him be a good person. We’re feeling such a mixture of things now. To finally sit with my wife and my baby, to be this new family, is so emotional, but there’s always this creeping fear for the future, the sensation of desperation. I’m trying to focus on the things we can do – we both go back to school next week to continue our studies of English and maths. I need to chat with the college to see if they can schedule one of us in the morning and the other in the afternoon so that we can both learn and take turns to look after the baby. I’m making sure our solicitor has everything he needs for our appeal. At the moment, thank god, we have a roof over our heads, hot water and a safe place to take care of our son. I’m telling myself that’s everything. As told to Anna Moore. Paul is in his 30s and is an asylum seeker living in the north of England. Names have been changed The Trussell Trust is an anti-poverty charity that campaigns to end the need for food banks. Show your support at: trusselltrust. org/guardianDo you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here. Harry Edward Styles is a middle-class white man with a nice face and an enormous bank account. “People like him” are not usually considered an oppressed minority. And yet the 29-year-old pop star has been widely accused of claiming to be a member of an underclass during the Grammy awards on Sunday night. “This doesn’t happen to people like me very often,” Styles said as he scooped up best pop vocal album and album of the year. Cue confusion and uproar as people pointed out that white men win awards rather often. Meanwhile, a black woman hasn’t won album of the year since Lauryn Hill in 1999. Brace yourself, because this article is about to go in one direction you may have thought I would never head. I am going to defend a rich man!Styles’ wording was clumsy and embarrassingly tone-deaf. I can see why it upset people. But vitriol towards him is misplaced: it seems to me that he is just a nice, slightly dim guy who can’t quite believe his good fortune and who has run out of things to say at award shows. Why vilify him for that?I have seen some people try to take a defence of him further and claim he was making an incisive point about the lack of working-class people in the British arts. There is certainly a lot to be said on this point, but it’s hard to see how Styles figures in that conversation. That he once had a part-time job in a bakery and went to a state school (a very good one!) hardly makes him working class. Having said that, the debate raging online about where Styles sits on the class spectrum is a fascinating insight into Britain’s class obsession. Speaking of spectrums, I also think it’s unfair that Styles is accused routinely of “queerbaiting”, or pretending to be LGBTQ+ in order to get attention (a debate that has resurfaced since the Grammys controversy). He likes experimenting with flamboyant clothes! That’s it! It’s weird and regressive to think that means he is making a statement about his sexual orientation or gender identity. Let the man wear his “clowncore” jumpsuits in peace. There are far more deserving targets for people’s anger. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnist When Hazel Settas took a job as housekeeper to a wealthy Tory MP, she evidently wasn’t ready for what she found. Her instructions for running the former minister Jonathan Djanogly’s £7m home read more like the backstage rider of a particularly demanding pop diva than something out of Mrs Beeton. Rules on the management of avocados alone ran to 100 words, with a strict system of rotation between bowl and fridge to maintain ripeness (“check to see if there are eight soft avocados in the fridge … if not add up the missing number of soft avocados and put this number of hard avocados into the fruit bowl”). Phone calls were to be answered within four rings, and there were instructions on carrying items correctly from the coffee table to the sink. Settas, who lasted only a fortnight in the job, said she had to work until 10 or 11 at night to complete her tasks and that the MP’s wife, Rebecca Silk, allegedly shouted at her to “hurry up”; the housekeeper cried, she says, in her room at night.“I was shocked she would behave like that when her husband was an MP,” Settas told the Sunday Mirror, after successfully pursuing Silk through the courts for £886 in wages that she argued she was owed. But, given how some of Djanogly’s colleagues have been behaving lately, perhaps it won’t have come as much of a shock to readers. A second, unnamed housekeeper, who also took legal action after working for the Djanogly-Silk household, was awarded £3,148 in unauthorised wage deductions, overtime and annual leave, with the judge concluding that Silk had “sought to deprive” her of important working rights. By grim coincidence, all this hit the headlines just as the House of Lords was due to debate the fate of employment laws post-Brexit – amid concerns that a raft of protections derived from the EU could be swept away at the stroke of a ministerial pen – and Downing Street was grappling with a series of workplace bullying allegations against deputy prime minister Dominic Raab (which he denies).Working for the rich is famously never easy, and the same can be true of cabinet ministers under pressure. What’s fascinating about both these cases is that they fall into a grey area of workplace behaviour that’s becoming more and more crucial to define. Dominic Raab: more civil servants in bullying complaint than previously thoughtRead moreWithholding pay is obviously against the law; nothing grey about that. But being strangely controlling about avocados isn’t illegal. The ministerial code does specifically outlaw bullying at work, defined by the civil service as intimidating or insulting behaviour. But it’s still ultimately a subjective judgment as to whether leaving junior officials in floods of tears, as Raab is said to have done, is a sacking offence or still just within the boundaries of what one ally tactfully calls behaving “like a CEO”. When does being the kind of scary boss many of us have occasionally encountered tip over into being the kind of boss nobody should have to tolerate? Or to put it another way: how far should anyone, in any walk of life, be allowed to behave like a jerk?On the one hand sits a “never did me any harm” brigade, who think it’s feeble to complain about the sort of ritual hazing that happened all the time when they were young. On the other are people who recognise that that was 30 years ago, and that Tory MPs who have spent a decade or more in parliament – as arcane a workplace, in its way, as the mansions of the super-rich – may have lost touch with what they fondly imagine the outside working world to be like. Mark Price, another former Tory minister and the former managing director of Waitrose, who is now running the digital career development platform WorkL, warned at the weekend that his firm’s research suggests 33% of British workers are considering leaving their jobs. That’s unusual, on the brink of a recession, but is a marker of changing times, where workers can – if only temporarily – afford to be more picky, with more vacancies lying open than a shrunken post-Brexit workforce can currently fill. Keeping people happy, Price told the Sunday Times, is now paramount for employers; the biggest driver of job satisfaction is a good relationship with your manager, yet on average British bosses dish out far more criticism than praise. Maybe the Ministry of Justice should get him in for some pointers. Or better still – and ideally before ministers run the red pen over all those hard-won employment rights – maybe this administration could accept that the world has moved on since the 1990s, and that whatever the 2023 definition of being “like a CEO” involves, it isn’t making people cry. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistDo you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here. Do you hate the idea of animal-free meat? Many people do. Unsurprisingly, livestock farmers are often furiously opposed. More surprisingly, so are some vegans: “Why can’t people eat tofu and lentils, like me?” Well, the new products – plant-based, microbial and cell-cultured meat and dairy – are not aimed at vegans, but at the far greater number who like the taste and texture of animals. Many others instinctively recoil from the idea of food that seems familiar, but isn’t. So here’s a question for all the sceptics. What do you intend to do about the soaring global demand for animal products, and its devastating impacts?Already, 60% of the mammals on Earth by weight are livestock. Humans account for 36%, wild mammals for just 4%. Of birds, poultry make up 71%, wild species only 29%. While the human population is growing at 1% a year, the livestock population is growing at 2. 4%. Global average meat consumption per person is 43kg a year, but swiftly heading towards the UK level of 82kg. The reason is Bennett’s Law: as people become richer, they eat more protein and fat, especially the flesh and secretions of animals. So, if you don’t like the new technologies, what solution do you propose? I keep asking, and the response is either furious or evasive. “It’s the wrong question!” “Who’s paying you?” “Do you want us to eat slime?”So far, only one of the people I’ve asked has answered it directly: the food campaigner Vandana Shiva. “You blindly echo the myth that as people get richer they eat more meat. Indians continue to be vegetarians even when they become rich. Food cultures are shaped by cultural and ecological values.” But meat-eating in India is rising rapidly, though many people do it secretly. In other words, despite religious proscriptions, enforced with vigilantism and, in some cases, murder, Bennett’s Law still applies. It’s as if we were urging people to burn less fossil fuel without offering a replacement: no solar, wind, geothermal or nuclear power. This issue is just as urgent, arguably even more so, as livestock farming attacks every Earth system. It’s the primary agent of habitat destruction and wildlife loss. It’s causing rivercide and dead zones at sea. It generates more greenhouse gas emissions than all the world’s transport. It sprawls across vast tracts of the planet, inflicting massive carbon and ecological opportunity costs. Both historically and currently, livestock farming is probably the world’s most powerful agent of colonial land grabbing and the displacement of Indigenous people. Meat is consuming the planet.‘Livestock farming sprawls across vast tracts of the planet, inflicting massive carbon and ecological costs.’ Destruction of the Amazon rainforest to create pasture land, Mato Grosso, Brazil. Photograph: Florian Kopp/imageBROKER/REX/ShutterstockSubstitutes for animal products can greatly reduce this damage. They can allow vast areas to be returned to dispossessed people and the ecosystems they defended. The first cell-cultured meat recently gained regulatory approval in the United States. At the same time, the taste and texture of plant-based alternatives has greatly improved. I’ve recently eaten three products that are almost indistinguishable from the originals: a steak made by a Slovenian company called Juicy Marbles, a “lamb” fillet from the Israeli company Redefine Meat, and sushi and tempura “seafood” at the London restaurant 123V. In response, Big Meat has ramped up its campaign of demonisation. That’s understandable. Less so is the support the animal industry receives from people who claim to be green, but happily recite its misleading propaganda. The professor of food and agricultural policy Robert Paarlberg compares this alliance to the inadvertent coalition of Baptists and bootleggers in the US a century ago. By lobbying successfully for the prohibition of alcohol, the Southern Baptists opened the door to gangsters trading in stronger and more dangerous drink. True environmentalists have a duty to break this ultra-conservative consensus. Adoption of the new technologies is likely to follow an S-curve: slow, then sudden. At first, uptake will be low and will suffer repeated setbacks. But as scale rises and prices fall, market penetration is likely to reach 10% or more. That’s the point at which linear growth suddenly switches to exponential growth. It’s a trend we’ve seen in dozens of technologies, from refrigerators to smartphones. skip past newsletter promotionSign up to Down to EarthFree weekly newsletterThe planet's most important stories. Get all the week's environment news - the good, the bad and the essential &lt;/div&gt;&lt;/label&gt;&lt;div class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-17gkgdc\&quot;&gt;&lt;div class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-lxzyg5\&quot;&gt;&lt;label for=\&quot;src-component-492735\&quot; class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-0\&quot;&gt;&lt;div class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-19ilr9m\&quot;&gt;Enter your email address &lt;/div&gt;&lt;/label&gt;&lt;input type=\&quot;email\&quot; id=\&quot;src-component-492735\&quot; aria-required=\&quot;true\&quot; aria-invalid=\&quot;false\&quot; aria-describedby=\&quot;\&quot; required=\&quot;\&quot; name=\&quot;email\&quot; class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-11bty1f\&quot;/&gt;&lt;/div&gt;&lt;button type=\&quot;submit\&quot; aria-live=\&quot;polite\&quot; class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f\&quot;&gt;Sign up&lt;/button&gt;&lt;/div&gt;&lt;/form&gt;&quot;,&quot;styles&quot;:&quot;&lt;style data-emotion=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-global 0\&quot;&gt;&lt;/style&gt;&lt;style data-emotion=\&quot;email-signup-iframe njjzu0 de6my7 17gkgdc lxzyg5 19ilr9m 11bty1f 1wosa0f\&quot;&gt;.email-signup-iframe-njjzu0 div{font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:0. 875rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;}.email-signup-iframe-de6my7{font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;color:#121212;}.email-signup-iframe-17gkgdc{display:-webkit-box;display:-webkit-flex;display:-ms-flexbox;display:flex;-webkit-flex-direction:row;-ms-flex-direction:row;flex-direction:row;-webkit-align-items:flex-start;-webkit-box-align:flex-start;-ms-flex-align:flex-start;align-items:flex-start;-webkit-box-flex-wrap:wrap;-webkit-flex-wrap:wrap;-ms-flex-wrap:wrap;flex-wrap:wrap;}.email-signup-iframe-lxzyg5{margin-right:12px;margin-bottom:8px;-webkit-flex-basis:335px;-ms-flex-preferred-size:335px;flex-basis:335px;-webkit-flex-shrink:1;-ms-flex-negative:1;flex-shrink:1;}.email-signup-iframe-19ilr9m{font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;color:#121212;position:absolute;overflow:hidden;white-space:nowrap;width:1px;height:1px;margin:-1px;padding:0;border:0;clip:rect(1px, 1px, 1px, 1px);-webkit-clip-path:inset(50%);-webkit-clip-path:inset(50%);clip-path:inset(50%);}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f{width:100%;box-sizing:border-box;height:44px;font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:400;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;color:#121212;background-color:#FFFFFF;border:2px solid #707070;padding:0 8px;margin-top:4px;height:36px;margin-top:0;}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:focus{border:2px solid #0077B6;outline:0;}html:not(.src-focus-disabled) .email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:focus{box-shadow:0 0 0 5px #0077B6;}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:invalid{box-shadow:none;}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:invalid[value]:not([value='']){border:4px solid #C70000;color:#121212;margin-top:0;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f{display:-webkit-inline-box;display:-webkit-inline-flex;display:-ms-inline-flexbox;display:inline-flex;-webkit-box-pack:justify;-webkit-justify-content:space-between;justify-content:space-between;-webkit-align-items:center;-webkit-box-align:center;-ms-flex-align:center;align-items:center;box-sizing:border-box;border:none;background:transparent;cursor:pointer;-webkit-transition:.3s ease-in-out;transition:.3s ease-in-out;-webkit-text-decoration:none;text-decoration:none;white-space:nowrap;font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;height:36px;min-height:36px;padding:0 16px;border-radius:36px;padding-bottom:2px;background-color:#052962;color:#FFFFFF;-webkit-box-pack:center;-ms-flex-pack:center;-webkit-justify-content:center;justify-content:center;background-color:#000000;-webkit-flex-basis:118px;-ms-flex-preferred-size:118px;flex-basis:118px;-webkit-flex-shrink:0;-ms-flex-negative:0;flex-shrink:0;margin-bottom:8px;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:disabled{cursor:not-allowed;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:focus{outline:0;}html:not(.src-focus-disabled) .email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:focus{outline:5px solid #0077B6;outline-offset:3px;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:hover{background-color:#234B8A;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:hover{background-color:#333333;}&lt;/style&gt;&quot;,&quot;newsletterId&quot;:&quot;green-light&quot;,&quot;successDescription&quot;:&quot;We'll send you Down to Earth every week.&quot;}" clientonly="true">Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. after newsletter promotionThe biggest hurdles will be political. As governments are pressurised by Big Meat, they will raise the kind of obstacles that, in the UK and US, have delayed the rollout of renewable electricity. The UK government, for example, is reported to be considering a ban on calling plant-based products “milk” and “butter”. What it will do about coconut milk and peanut butter is anyone’s guess. No VAT is charged on meat and milk here, but most plant-based alternatives must pay 20%.The regulators that might approve the new products are often overwhelmed. Brexit has dumped a massive workload on the UK’s Food Standards Agency and its budget falls far short of what it needs. At the same time, it has been flooded with applications for CBD (cannabidiol) products: it could be years before it can assess alternative proteins. None of these questions should be left to industry and government. Environmental campaigners should be working not to destroy the green alternatives but to ensure they are regulated properly and, through effective anti-trust laws, do not become as concentrated in the hands of a few corporations as the meat trade is. As always, this will be a political struggle as much as a technological one. And we need to decide which team we are on. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnist My dad is entitled to a rebate from his electricity provider – which got more and more urgent when temperatures dropped to -8C. He doesn’t have central heating, he’s 6ft 4in but only weighs about 8 stone. He needs the space heater on, but electricity has been costing him £15 a week. To claim the rebate on his behalf – which isn’t paid in cash, it just credits his account – I have to go to a post office with one of three forms of ID: either a passport, a driving licence or a utility bill. But my dad doesn’t have a passport or a driving licence. What’s the point when you’re too sick to travel or drive? He doesn’t have a utility bill as it’s all done online: who has a utility bill in 2023?For weeks, my life has been hanging on the phone to his electricity provider, who assure me every time that the post office will accept alternative ID, like letters from the DWP or the council or the NHS – and then queueing in every post office within walking distance, only to be turned away in front of a long line of neighbours because it’s not the ID specified by the provider. Yesterday, finally, my dad told me to give up as I probably looked too scruffy – and ask my landlord to have a go instead. My landlord went in – a middle-aged, middle class, white man – and the post office added the rebate to my dad’s account straight away. It may be just coincidence, but things like that make me so angry. I’m walking around in this total rage – and then a day later, I’m numb, then I’m so tired and exhausted to my bones, I feel like I’m going to cry. Then all that passes and I feel really accepting of all the stuff I can’t change – before something happens to trigger the anger again. I’m living on this constant emotional rollercoaster. Loads of my energy is spent keeping Dad warm. It’s hot-water bottles, blankets and I’ve now ordered him heated clothing – leggings and a vest that you can charge up with a USB, a bit like an electric blanket, but wearable. They were expensive – £30, so it was a big decision – but he’s so poorly that if he doesn’t stay warm, he’ll die. Like everything in the post, though, they still haven’t arrived. We had a quiet Christmas this year. With Dad, everything is always up in the air. No one wants to make plans in case he’s not well enough to do anything – and when you’re poor, you don’t tend to plan an awful lot anyway. You live day to day – and it’s really noticeable that everybody seems to be planning less. It’s getting weirder in this country. No post, no trains, no ambulances. The strikes have been a long time coming. No one is talking about nights out; there’s not a lot of getting together. The thermostat is kept at 10 in my home, so it’s not the best place to invite your mates, although the family did manage to gather on Christmas Eve. I’m feeling hopeful that Dad is going to get a bit better next year. After seven months of waiting with the NHS, he has just had some polyps removed from his colon and he seems to be improving. I think he’s starting to eat more again. My Christmas present for him was clothes in a bigger size as I’m hoping that he’s going to put on weight – although, of course, they’re still in the post. As told to Anna Moore. Siobhan is in her 30s and lives in the Midlands. Names have been changed The Trussell Trust is an anti-poverty charity that campaigns to end the need for food banks. Show your support at: trusselltrust. org/guardian In recent times, Prince Andrew has been the subject of both a televised comedy musical and a number of formal council petitions from Brits who no longer wish their street to be called Prince Andrew Drive or Prince Andrew Way. Yet, amazingly, the duke somehow still remains the most ridiculous thing about his own life. Barely a week goes by without some wince-inducing story about his comeback plans finding its well-sourced way into the news. After many years of non-cooperation with any number of attempts to get to the bottom of her allegations against him, Andrew last year finally settled a civil claim with Virginia Giuffre, who was trafficked by the deceased paedophile financier Jeffrey Epstein. The settlement did not include any admission of guilt. Giuffre is now reported to be writing a book about her experiences with Epstein and beyond, and though her settlement with the duke would prevent her speaking out in detail about Prince Andrew, multiple articles suggest he is ready to launch a lawsuit should she mention him. “Andrew and his lawyers are ready to go on the attack,” a “source familiar with the case” told the Mail at the weekend. “Then her claims will be put under scrutiny for the first time in a court of law.” Finally! I don’t know about you but I always pay a reported £12m to settle a case out of court, when all I really want is for its claims to be heard in a court. Then, last week, allies of the duke let it be known that “details are about to be made public which will change people’s perceptions of him”. Intriguing. Are those details … could they possibly be … a photograph subsequently published on the front page of the Daily Telegraph last Saturday? Unclear. But oh dear me, where to start on this picture, released by Ian Maxwell, the brother of Epstein’s convicted accomplice, Ghislaine?You will almost certainly have seen this truly cursed image by now. If you somehow swerved it, however, the details are as follows. Two (mercifully clothed) adults are sitting in the bath of Ghislaine’s former Belgravia mews house, which you will recall is where Giuffre alleges she was first coerced into sexual activity with Prince Andrew. Around the faces of the two people in the photo – and I can barely believe I’m typing this, but here we are – there are elasticated laminated A4 sheets of paper, worn as masks. Think of it as Eyes Wide Shit. One mask bears the face of 17-year-old Virginia Giuffre, from the notorious original photo of her with the duke’s hand round her waist, taken in the house in question on the night in question. Odd choice – but not the oddest, let’s face it. The other figure is wearing a contemporary photo of Prince Andrew, 62, which only serves to emphasise the bizarre grossness of what the reader is being asked to behold and consider. Unbelievably, actual lawyers had something to do with this nutso line of defence, which the Telegraph chose to headline: “The photo that ‘clears Duke’ over bath sex”.We might begin by querying whether “bath sex” is really the correct term for alleged rape of a trafficked teenager. But wait, because there’s more. The image is accompanied by quotes from Ian. I always feel I missed the point in time that the utterances of Ian Maxwell began being treated with something other than quizzical contempt. When precisely did this switcheroo happen? Anyway, here is Maxwell on the photo, which he seems to have personally staged. “I am releasing my photographs now because the truth needs to come out,” explains Ian, apparently dialling in from the Arkham Asylum of British public life. “They show conclusively that the bath is too small for any kind of sex frolicking.” Two points. One: they don’t show anything of the sort. And two: What? WHAAAAAAAAAAAAT?!?!“The family have even supplied the bath’s dimensions,” gibbers the Telegraph, “revealing that the base of the bathtub measures 1,359mm by 380mm.” I’m not sure any newspaper in the land can credibly take the high ground on the lunacies of other publications. There but for the grace, and all of that. But I don’t imagine I was the only reader who saw this picture online and had to go to the source to check whether that really and truly was the actual front page. Yet it honestly was. Less of a marmalade-dropper, more of a stomach-vacater. If that photo wasn’t the gamechanging gambit at which Andrew’s allies were hinting, perhaps it was last week’s interview with Ghislaine herself. In this, Maxwell clutched one of the visiting-room telephones at the Florida prison in which she is currently serving a 20-year-sentence for her crimes, and explained through the glass that the original photo of the duke with his arm round Giuffre (in which she herself is pictured smirking stage left) was a fake. If that was the de-smoked gun, then unfortunately all it took was for the news photographer who had originally snapped the image from a hard copy Giuffre handed him to produce his image of the back of that photo. This displays the standard developers’ date stamp. It turns out to have been an ordinary printed snap, processed at a one-hour lab at Walgreens on 13 March 2001, three days after the date on which Giuffre alleged she was first forced into sexual activity with Andrew. The news photographer had gone back through his archives after being incensed by Ghislaine’s interview last week. As he put it: “I thought, ‘here we go again’.”And here we do seem to keep going again. Quite how long the duke will fail to realise his comeback is doomed is not clear. News that he would no longer have offices at Buckingham Palace, which is undergoing a £369m refurbishment, was tempered by hints that he would still probably be granted rooms at nearby St James’s Palace. But for what, given he appears to have nothing to do other than mount a wildly ill-advised rearguard action against deeply unsavoury claims he decided to settle?Andrew no longer enjoys the range of confected positions that enabled him to be helicoptered between the world’s finest golf courses. Does one really need a suite of damask-walled and lavishly gilded rooms with liveried attendees for his current activities? I can’t help feeling a lock-up with a single swinging lightbulb somewhere off the M25 might be more appropriate in the circumstances. That is the only staged photo any of us wishes to see. Failing that, a silent retirement for this lifelong self-saboteur would be in all interests, including his own. skip past newsletter promotionSign up to First EditionFree daily newsletterArchie Bland and Nimo Omer take you through the top stories and what they mean, free every weekday morning &lt;/div&gt;&lt;/label&gt;&lt;div class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-17gkgdc\&quot;&gt;&lt;div class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-lxzyg5\&quot;&gt;&lt;label for=\&quot;src-component-401756\&quot; class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-0\&quot;&gt;&lt;div class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-19ilr9m\&quot;&gt;Enter your email address &lt;/div&gt;&lt;/label&gt;&lt;input type=\&quot;email\&quot; id=\&quot;src-component-401756\&quot; aria-required=\&quot;true\&quot; aria-invalid=\&quot;false\&quot; aria-describedby=\&quot;\&quot; required=\&quot;\&quot; name=\&quot;email\&quot; class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-11bty1f\&quot;/&gt;&lt;/div&gt;&lt;button type=\&quot;submit\&quot; aria-live=\&quot;polite\&quot; class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f\&quot;&gt;Sign up&lt;/button&gt;&lt;/div&gt;&lt;/form&gt;&quot;,&quot;styles&quot;:&quot;&lt;style data-emotion=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-global 0\&quot;&gt;&lt;/style&gt;&lt;style data-emotion=\&quot;email-signup-iframe njjzu0 de6my7 17gkgdc lxzyg5 19ilr9m 11bty1f 1wosa0f\&quot;&gt;.email-signup-iframe-njjzu0 div{font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:0. 875rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;}.email-signup-iframe-de6my7{font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;color:#121212;}.email-signup-iframe-17gkgdc{display:-webkit-box;display:-webkit-flex;display:-ms-flexbox;display:flex;-webkit-flex-direction:row;-ms-flex-direction:row;flex-direction:row;-webkit-align-items:flex-start;-webkit-box-align:flex-start;-ms-flex-align:flex-start;align-items:flex-start;-webkit-box-flex-wrap:wrap;-webkit-flex-wrap:wrap;-ms-flex-wrap:wrap;flex-wrap:wrap;}.email-signup-iframe-lxzyg5{margin-right:12px;margin-bottom:8px;-webkit-flex-basis:335px;-ms-flex-preferred-size:335px;flex-basis:335px;-webkit-flex-shrink:1;-ms-flex-negative:1;flex-shrink:1;}.email-signup-iframe-19ilr9m{font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;color:#121212;position:absolute;overflow:hidden;white-space:nowrap;width:1px;height:1px;margin:-1px;padding:0;border:0;clip:rect(1px, 1px, 1px, 1px);-webkit-clip-path:inset(50%);-webkit-clip-path:inset(50%);clip-path:inset(50%);}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f{width:100%;box-sizing:border-box;height:44px;font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:400;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;color:#121212;background-color:#FFFFFF;border:2px solid #707070;padding:0 8px;margin-top:4px;height:36px;margin-top:0;}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:focus{border:2px solid #0077B6;outline:0;}html:not(.src-focus-disabled) .email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:focus{box-shadow:0 0 0 5px #0077B6;}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:invalid{box-shadow:none;}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:invalid[value]:not([value='']){border:4px solid #C70000;color:#121212;margin-top:0;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f{display:-webkit-inline-box;display:-webkit-inline-flex;display:-ms-inline-flexbox;display:inline-flex;-webkit-box-pack:justify;-webkit-justify-content:space-between;justify-content:space-between;-webkit-align-items:center;-webkit-box-align:center;-ms-flex-align:center;align-items:center;box-sizing:border-box;border:none;background:transparent;cursor:pointer;-webkit-transition:.3s ease-in-out;transition:.3s ease-in-out;-webkit-text-decoration:none;text-decoration:none;white-space:nowrap;font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;height:36px;min-height:36px;padding:0 16px;border-radius:36px;padding-bottom:2px;background-color:#052962;color:#FFFFFF;-webkit-box-pack:center;-ms-flex-pack:center;-webkit-justify-content:center;justify-content:center;background-color:#000000;-webkit-flex-basis:118px;-ms-flex-preferred-size:118px;flex-basis:118px;-webkit-flex-shrink:0;-ms-flex-negative:0;flex-shrink:0;margin-bottom:8px;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:disabled{cursor:not-allowed;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:focus{outline:0;}html:not(.src-focus-disabled) .email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:focus{outline:5px solid #0077B6;outline-offset:3px;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:hover{background-color:#234B8A;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:hover{background-color:#333333;}&lt;/style&gt;&quot;,&quot;newsletterId&quot;:&quot;morning-briefing&quot;,&quot;successDescription&quot;:&quot;We'll send you First Edition every weekday&quot;}" clientonly="true">Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. after newsletter promotion Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here. It is with some chagrin that I see Marie Kondo making international news with the bombshell that she’s pretty much stopped tidying at home since the birth of her third child: “Up until now, I was a professional tidier, so I did my best to keep my home tidy at all times,” she told the Washington Post. “I have kind of given up on that, in a good way for me. Now I realise what is important to me is enjoying spending time with my children at home.”You could almost hear the world exhale in relief at this change of heart: Kondo is perhaps the leading evangelist for order and decluttering, author and Netflix poster-woman for the good life. If she can’t make tidying work with three kids around, when it’s her brand, her identity and her life’s work, the rest of us are just fine. It’s like if anti-cigarette guru Allen Carr had started smoking again. On the one hand, shame, but on the other: what a stunning vindication of human frailty. My particular chagrin stems from the time Marie Kondo came to my house, tidied my desk, whose two square feet took her three and a half hours, and told me this very thing – that she’d stopped tidying at home – even taking the time to point out that she had never said this to anyone before, and I still didn’t realise it was news. How could it be? When you have three children and one is a baby, you’re smashing it out of the park just by ending each day not in A&amp;E. Human nature – indeed, all nature – tends towards entropy. People who think they can master chaos just don’t have enough children, or dogs, or interests.‘Marie Kondo is perhaps the leading evangelist for order and decluttering, author and Netflix poster-woman for the good life.’ Kondo on the Netflix series Sparking Joy. Photograph: NetflixI sometimes wonder how far I’d let my slovenliness take me, if I lived alone. Would I let bits actually fall off my house, so that it was a colourful riot of buckets catching leaks? Would I turn that into a feature (an interiors statement, I mean, not an article, of course I would turn it into an article)? My dad once went 11 years without washing his pillowcases, and they were stiff like a Barbour jacket with the accretion of head grease. I imagine I’d be something like that. Instead, it’s a perpetual negotiation between my low standards and the demands of others: a spouse’s inclination to order, the children’s strong preference for mess to magically disappear while they’re at school. I think I keep it together, with the caveat that the only entirely clear surface in the house remains the desk that Marie Kondo tidied, and that’s only because I experience it like an accusation and have taken to working elsewhere (in bed; it’s also been pretty cold lately).“Tidy house, tidy mind” feels so intuitive. Naturally, when there’s a place for everything and everything’s in its place, you feel more in control of your environment, spend less time looking for your keys. But the untold negative of that picture is that it entails constant vigilance over ultimately trivial matters: have I correctly put the thyme back among the Mediterranean herbs, rather than shoved it randomly at eye level probably next to the Nutella? What’s the perfect place to stack towels? What do you do with a book that you feel you should read but know you’re never going to? The language of priorities is not just the religion of socialism, it’s the religion of everything: every time I prioritise getting a weird stain off a table, there are much more bewitching things I’m not thinking about, and if those things are themselves also trivial, what’s it to you?Queen of clean Marie Kondo says she has ‘kind of given up’ on tidying at homeRead moreThis is what Kondo has finally realised: that every minute decision contains an opportunity cost, the opportunity being to chill the hell out. If she hadn’t already had this epiphany when we met, I’d like to think I maybe rubbed off on her a little bit. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnist A sure sign of a happy country is the eagerness of foreigners to come to live there. One such state is Great Britain. Newcomers are a net benefit to a modern economy and should be welcomed accordingly. Thus, their compliment is returned. Last year Britain’s ageing population was supplemented by a record net immigration of half a million people. After two years of pandemic retirements and EU departures under Brexit, this immigration came as a salvation to health and care employers, caterers, builders, hauliers and farmers. Yet these businesses are still desperate for more. In England, care is short of 165,000 workers and health needs 130,000, while half of UK building firms are short-staffed and a third of all UK firms say they lack a full complement of staff. Last month the chancellor duly issued a plea for 300,000 over-50s who had retired after lockdown to return to work to fill 1. 19m vacancies. It was as if the nation faced defeat and was calling its veterans back into service. Yet this same government is spending somewhere over £1bn a year billeting able-bodied Afghans, Iraqis, Syrians and Albanians in London hotels and elsewhere, paying them and their families pocket money on the strict condition they do no work. Should they sneak out to become hospital porters, road diggers, fruit pickers or care assistants, Suella Braverman’s Home Office will hunt them down and send them packing. Should they besiege labour contractors’ vans under scruffy motorways they risk deportation. Should they dare to wheel a trolley, deliver a pizza or handle a daffodil, Braverman will order them out. Whose side is she on?This policy is a mass of hypocrisy. Brexit stifled Britain’s supply of skilled and seasonal labour from eastern and southern Europe. Market forces responded by sucking in unprecedented numbers of non-European workers. Rishi Sunak now finds himself stuck. He must promise to stifle immigration and yet somehow find more workers. To satisfy rightwingers, he has even suggested withdrawing from the European human rights convention to evict asylum seekers. Only Russia has so far reneged on that convention. Sunak is between a rock and a hard place. Every democracy, certainly in Europe, faces political tension over immigration. Germany has welcomed both Turks and Syrians against strong domestic opposition because it needed their labour. Britain is trapped in a regulatory morass of political asylum, refugee diplomacy, key-worker entitlement, people trafficking and enslavement. Tens of thousands of people who are eager to benefit the British economy are treated as if they were a semi-criminal class. British taxpayers are now paying them not to earn a living. Despite appearances, public opinion is ambivalent. A recent YouGov poll showed a majority of Britons oppose “more immigration” yet also welcome it for specific jobs. These are across the board, from NHS staff to builders and farmers. Some tinkering at the edges of policy may be possible. The scandal of boat crossings could be met by instantly returning them to France, if France agrees. Visa offices abroad could ease up, reducing the need for lengthy processing in the UK. The Brexit bar on free movement with Europe will surely one day end. For the time being, Sunak should have the guts to tell Britons they have nothing to fear and much to gain from immigration. As for the newcomers themselves, he should welcome and thank them for coming. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist Keir Starmer’s Labour party may well win the next election. Its leadership have begun to put together a story of where Britain is going wrong, and what Labour could do instead. But without commitments on spending, the party will fail in government. Across the world, the economic outlook is bad, with the IMF forecasting widespread recession over the next year. Food prices are continuing to rise. There are the early signs of debt crises in the global south. Climate breakdown and geopolitical tensions are adding to the instability. If last year was bad, this year is set to be worse. However, if the picture everywhere is grim, Britain is uniquely underperforming. Britain is the only G7 country not to have recovered to pre-pandemic levels of GDP. And this failed recovery comes after a decade in which productivity growth and real incomes stagnated. Labour, if it wins the next election, is likely to inherit an economic situation worse than that faced by any government since 1945. The contrast with 1997, as Andy Beckett has suggested, is stark: while Blair inherited a growing economy and rising living standards for most, Starmer is likely to immediately face a recession, collapsing public services, high inflation and the rising costs of climate breakdown. The major culprit in our decline was austerity. The social damage has been immense: if the NHS is on its knees today, for example, it is not only from its own underfunding, but cuts elsewhere in the system, notably to social care. Michael Marmot’s report on healthcare after the pandemic made grimly clear just how much damage austerity had done. Life expectancy, after more than a century of improvement, has now started to stagnate. But the impacts stretch right across the economy. The former Bank of England chief economist Andy Haldane has warned that the worsening health of the British public has become an economic drag. About half a million people have dropped out of the labour force since the spring of 2019, largely in part due to Covid. NHS and public health failures feed into economic woes. Both Starmer and the shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, have committed to opposing austerity. Reeves rightly told last year’s Labour conference that it “has left our country poorer, our public services at breaking point, and our public finances in tatters”. Starmer, in his new year speech, has expanded his critique of the Tory government to include what he labelled the “Westminster system” that “hoards power” in a few hands. He has spoken of the need for “national renewal”, driven by “missions” including rapid decarbonisation – a nod towards the influence of the economist Mariana Mazzucato. The planned creation of a publicly owned renewable generator, Great British Energy, to deliver rapid decarbonisation shows some willingness to break with the neoliberal past. Starmer is right to broaden the critique. Failure on the scale of Britain’s is about more than just a single party. Austerity is a classic case: in defiance of good economic sense, a radical programme of spending cuts from 2010 onwards was supported by almost our entire political class. Treasury civil servants drew up the plans. The Institute for Fiscal Studies justified them to the public. Our media repeated the government’s idiotic slogans. Labour, with Ed Balls as shadow chancellor, fell into line. And the result has been a catastrophic economic and social failure. To break with the legacy of failure, however, will require increased spending, and more. Gordon Brown, after 2000, increased spending on public services, but in the absence of institutional reform, and with New Labour actively encouraging a bloated financial services sector, his public spending rises did not survive a change of government. Labour leaderships since 2010 have identified versions of the underlying institutional failures, both in the state machine and the wider economy. Ed Miliband had “producers v predators”. Jeremy Corbyn spoke of Britain’s “rigged economy”. Corbyn’s proposed economic programme backed up this rhetoric with important institutional changes, including sectoral collective bargaining and expanded worker ownership of companies. A Keir Starmer government might be more radical than you think | Michael JacobsRead moreBut if Corbyn ended up, by 2019, heavily focused on dramatic spending increases at the expense of his broader programme, Starmer has the opposite problem: focusing on a few constitutional changes and a critique of the institutions but making very few spending commitments. From the NHS to our schools, every part of the public sector needs more cash. Whatever the shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, might hint at, there is no magic wand in the private sector that can be waved. And in conditions of profound economic failure, no longer enjoying the luxury of ultra-low borrowing costs and with the exchange rate a potential concern, spending increases will have to be met by at least some tax rises. The grave risk to Starmer’s programme is that its institutional critique and a few worthwhile ideas will be eviscerated in government if funding is not rapidly made available for improved public services. Peter Mandelson and Ed Balls have been among those trying to talk down spending increases. But this isn’t the 1990s. The public reaction to continued austerity, especially from a Labour government, is likely to be overwhelming: in protests, strikes – and at the polls. Even governments with a healthy majority can sometimes only last a single term, as the Tories appear to be about to demonstrate. “National renewal” cannot be achieved on the cheap. James Meadway is director of the Progressive Economy Forum The International Monetary Fund could hardly have made it clearer this week. The chronic British disease, the underlying one that marks out the UK from the developed world crowd, is our low economic growth. The IMF’s revised forecasts for 2023 certainly make stark reading for Rishi Sunak. Last week, at a cabinet awayday at Chequers, Sunak told colleagues they would be judged on five issues at the next election, of which one would be their success in expanding the economy. Yet just a few days later, the IMF revised its UK growth forecast down from the very modest 0. 3% increase it posted three months ago to a 0. 6% contraction. With that new forecast, Sunak’s already steep route to electoral success got steeper and more slippery. But this isn’t Sunak’s problem alone. It’s a national challenge, affecting all of us. Strikingly, the UK was alone in suffering this humiliating revision. The IMF is forecasting growth for every other developed or large developing economy this year. That list includes not just all the countries some Conservative writers spend their careers disparaging, like France, Germany and Japan, but also even Russia, despite its wartime sanctions. To be fair, none of this is to say that global economic growth is either booming or unproblematic. Neither is true. Global growth is slowing this year, and the deceleration is particularly marked across the advanced economies, the US included, not just in Britain. Growth, in developed and developing economies alike, is also a central cause of the global climate crisis and therefore cannot be ignored. But it is to say that Britain is at the back of the field, and that the gap with the pack ahead just got bigger. There is a danger that Britain loses touch with its competitors. That will be an ineradicable inheritance for whatever government follows Sunak’s. True, not all the reasons lie at the government’s door. Yet many do – two of them in particular. One is the short-term legacy of the Liz Truss/ Kwasi Kwarteng tax-cutting budget, which led to higher taxes, a spike in borrowing costs, increased interest rates, a contraction in the housing market and a lurch in market confidence. The other is Brexit, which continues to damage UK trade and create major shortfalls in the labour market, not least in the health service. The UK’s high relative dependency on imported gas at a time of sharply increased energy prices has not helped either.‘Brexit continues to damage UK trade and create major shortfalls in the labour market, not least in the health service.’ Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty ImagesHowever, to read some of Britain’s rightwing newspapers this week, it is as if the events of last autumn never happened at all. Papers such as the Daily Telegraph and the Daily Mail are not merely in denial about the economic harm caused by Brexit, they also continued to claim this week that the answer to everything is tax cuts. If the economy is failing, there should be tax cuts. If it is booming, it’s time for tax cuts too. This is as daft and meaningless as Douglas Adams’s claim that the answer to everything is 42. In this, though, these papers speak to and for a significant strand in the Conservative party that is extremely difficult for Sunak to manage, including at Westminster. It’s the strand that sees government as a problem and taxes as bad, that thinks both should be slashed to let growth loose, that backed Truss last summer and that would back Boris Johnson – and maybe even Suella Braverman – if either makes a bid to topple Sunak this year. All of which leaves Sunak and the more cautious majority of the Conservative parliamentary party in a bind from which they cannot extricate either the government or, more importantly, the country. There is neither time nor resource for the Conservatives before the election. The tasks Sunak set them at Chequers look insurmountable at present. Many will spare the Conservatives their pity. Yet this still leaves Britain in an economic policy bind, with less policy flexibility than other countries to generate the wealth in incomes and taxes that would enable households to cope, businesses to innovate, and trade and the state to begin the repair of the public services. It is a national crisis, not just a party political one. It would constrain Labour’s options, too. There is plenty of growth strategy thinking out there for Labour to draw on that does not necessarily involve tax cuts or rises. Support for the new technological and green energy economies through public-private partnerships is many Labour strategists’ long-term favourite. Investment in education and childcare to get more people back into the labour market is another. But there are more politically charged issues too, like increasing immigration or reforming (not just liberalising) planning laws, both of which would be unpopular with many. Britain must also grasp the Brexit nettle and improve access to and from European markets. Few of these offer quick fixes, though, and if Britain has fallen further behind the pack in 2024, the gap will have widened and the inequities will have become harder still to overcome. A new government is certainly a necessary answer for Britain’s problems. But no one should pretend it is a sufficient one. Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnist He’s not a usual suspect. He’s known for having won a Nobel prize for economics, and for writing the international bestseller Thinking, Fast and Slow, rather than for manning the barricades or wielding a placard. But this week, I spoke to Daniel Kahneman, who soon turns 89, and was shocked to hear the despair in his voice.“It’s just a horror,” the Israeli-born professor told me. “This is the worst threat to Israel since 1948,” the year of the state’s founding, he said – worse even than the Yom Kippur war of 1973, when Israel’s survival seemed to hang in the balance – because this time the damage “may be impossible to repair”.Kahneman was not speaking about a foreign army massing on the country’s borders, an Iranian nuclear bomb or the gathering prospect of a third Palestinian uprising (though we’ll get to that), but rather something Israel is doing to itself: what Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, gently calls his “judicial reform” plan, but what others describe as the evisceration of the Israeli courts, handing unchecked power to the government. This week, the visiting US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, delivered a milder, diplomatic version of the same warning, giving Netanyahu a civics lesson on the importance of an independent judiciary and the rule of law. Meanwhile, hundreds of notables, Kahneman among them, signed an “emergency letter” denouncing the proposed changes, while the head of one of Israel’s biggest tech companies announced he was leaving the country in protest. Their objection is to a plan that would limit the supreme court’s power to strike down the decisions of politicians, allow Netanyahu or any future prime minister to override a court ruling by a simple majority in parliament, and make judges the handpicked appointments of politicians. As things stand, the supreme court is the only major curb on government power in Israel: the country has no written constitution and no second chamber. If the court is gutted, that will let Netanyahu rule unrestrained – and let him off the hook, as he stands trial and faces the possibility of jail on corruption charges. Kahneman says Israel will join a club whose charter members are Viktor Orbán’s Hungary and Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s Turkey: “Israel will be a pseudo-democracy.”‘This week, the visiting US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, gave Netanyahu a civics lesson on the importance of an independent judiciary.’ Photograph: ReutersOf course, plenty will say Israel has been a pseudo-democracy for nearly 56 years, ever since it became the military occupier of the Palestinian territories gained in the 1967 war. For them, the current gloom of Israel’s scholars and tech entrepreneurs might seem a welcome sign that the whole Israeli edifice is about to come tumbling down. But that fails to reckon with an obvious truth: the losers of the changes now afoot will include dissenting Israeli Jews, to be sure, but among those to suffer most directly will, inevitably, be Palestinians. That’s true in ways both obvious and not. Start with the obvious. By serving as a brake on the tyranny of the majority, the supreme court has regularly protected the rights of minorities – including the 20% of Israeli citizens who are Palestinian Arab. The judges’ record has been far from perfect, but if these reforms go ahead and the courts are reduced to toothless creatures of the government, things will be far worse. One example: Netanyahu’s far-right, ultra-nationalist coalition partners are itching to ban Israel’s Arab parties from standing in elections and sitting in the Knesset. If the supreme court is stripped of its powers, there will be nothing and no one to stop them. But this goes wider. At that Jerusalem press conference, Blinken reiterated Washington’s longstanding support for the two-state solution: the hope that the conflict will be solved by a secure Israel existing alongside an independent Palestine. That’s been the boilerplate position of the international community for decades. It goes back nearly a century, ever since the Peel commission first proposed partition when the British were in charge, back in 1937. Its advocates see it as the only possible answer to the Israel-Palestine conundrum. There’s just one problem: it is all but dead. Talk to those on the ground and they describe not a two-state solution, but a one-state reality. The green line between the Israel established in 1948 and the post-1967 occupied territories has been steadily erased, with settlements, roads and infrastructure ensuring the two are so entwined that any future disentanglement – necessary for the creation of a Palestinian state – is practically impossible. The result is that de facto single state, in which the Israeli government is the master (a picture that will only become starker if, as many predict, the Palestinian Authority collapses). In this situation, the removal of the last restraints on Israeli executive power through “judicial reform” becomes all the more alarming. At Netanyahu’s side are ministerial allies who don’t hide their determination to make life ever more unbearable for the Palestinians who inhabit the one-state reality. One is moving to make even harsher the conditions in which Palestinian prisoners held on security grounds are kept, another to confiscate an increased chunk of funds owed to the Palestinian Authority. A future looms in which the kind of violence witnessed last week – 10 dead Palestinians in Jenin; seven Jews killed leaving a synagogue in Jerusalem; the arrest of a Palestinian shooter aged just 13 – is repeated in endless, degenerating bloodshed. Is there any way out? No one talks about talks any more. There is no desire or capacity for Israeli-Palestinian negotiations; the two sides are too far apart. The US has apparently abandoned its role as would-be broker: in a revealing exchange last week, the state department spokesman refused to even use the word “occupation”.And yet, there is one move that could be made, one weapon the opponents of Netanyahu have barely picked up. Look at the results that brought this far-right government to power: in terms of votes cast, the Netanyahu bloc’s victory was narrow. The trouble was, Netanyahu’s opponents were split among themselves and failed to draw in enough of the constituency that could make all the difference: the one fifth of Israeli citizens who are Palestinian Arab. Overall turnout in the November election topped 70%, but among Israeli Arabs it was just 53. 2%. Had Arabs voted in the same numbers as Jews, Netanyahu would not be prime minister. To remedy that will require, first, a wholesale change in mindset on the part of the mainstream Israeli left, one that at last listens to Palestinian demands for equality inside the green line and an end to occupation beyond it. That could, in turn, prompt a sea change among Palestinian-Israelis, a recognition that a de facto boycott of Israel’s political institutions might have made sense when a separate Palestinian state seemed on the horizon, but makes no sense now. It only strengthens those bent on making their lives worse. Netanyahu is on the brink of a power grab that will destroy Israel’s oft-repeated boast to be the only democracy in the Middle East. That may be too late to avert, but it would be one of history’s great ironies if the only people who can save Israel from itself turn out to be the Palestinians. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnist Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here. European governments have for many years basked in a sense of climate superiority over the US. We had the most ambitious climate goals; we were the constructive actor at Cop conferences; we had carbon-pricing mechanisms; and since 1990, we have reduced emissions by 28% against just 2% in the US. The US, by contrast, had climate-denying Republicans. The Biden administration now has the world’s most generous package of climate incentives – a $370bn green subsidy package, which goes by the misnomer Inflation Reduction Act. But instead of celebrating the US handouts and tax breaks for investment in such things as electric vehicles and solar panels, many European governments are furious. Yes, it’s good for the planet. But it’s even better for American industry as the new US green subsidies are only available for products “made in America”. The scale of financing is such that some European companies are already making plans to shift production across the Atlantic. Europe fears deindustrialisation and accuses the US of protectionism and unfair competition. Just do the same, Washington argues. Develop your own green industrial policy and both sides of the pond can then lead the climate revolution together. Europe should indeed understand that a great transformation is taking shape in the US. Not only is the climate crisis finally being taken seriously. But industrial planning – or what some now call the designer economy – is back in fashion across the political spectrum. This transformation opens a unique opportunity for Europe and the world. The European Commission seems to understand this: along with a temporary relaxation of state aid rules to stimulate green projects, Brussels wants a joint European sovereignty fund to channel money to green industry. If taken seriously, this would trigger the emergence of a continent-wide industrial policy, accelerating Europe’s green transformation and the EU’s economic integration. It would place the first- and third-largest economies in the world on an equal climate-war footing, finally making emissions reduction targets a realistic prospect. With the US now on board, this is no longer mere wishful thinking. But the ball is in Europe’s court. And if you think the Americans getting ahead of Europe on climate sounds like the world upside down, wait until you hear this: the main opponents of a bold response are the supposedly great Europeans Olaf Scholz and Emmanuel Macron – with the forever despondent Dutch premier, Mark Rutte. And the main supporter? The far-right nationalist Italian prime minister, Giorgia Meloni.‘Giorgia Meloni understands that Italy’s national interest lies in a united European response.’ Photograph: Alessandro Serranò/REX/ShutterstockGermany, and to a lesser extent France, are foot-dragging on the commission’s ambitions. Germany’s finance minister, Christian Lindner, has firmly opposed repeating the Covid-era joint borrowing fund for climate purposes. The pandemic fund was intended as a one-off, he said, not the beginning of a federalised treasury. Much better, Berlin argues, to simply allow each country to subsidise industry nationally as it sees fit. France agrees, and while it accepts the theoretical idea of a joint fund it suggests merely rebranding unspent pandemic money for the purposes of green investment. This, however, would be no better than the economic nationalism that Europe accuses the US of. When the EU relaxed state aid rules for energy in response to the war in Ukraine last year, nearly 80% of new subsidies were found to have been dished out in Germany and to a lesser extent France. Authorising more national industrial subsidies would open the floodgates to beggar-thy-neighbour competition within the EU, with Germany and France, the biggest industrial players, siphoning off clean energy industry from the rest of the continent. skip past newsletter promotionSign up to This is EuropeFree weekly newsletterThe most pivotal stories and debates for Europeans – from identity to economics to the environment &lt;/div&gt;&lt;/label&gt;&lt;div class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-17gkgdc\&quot;&gt;&lt;div class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-lxzyg5\&quot;&gt;&lt;label for=\&quot;src-component-362114\&quot; class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-0\&quot;&gt;&lt;div class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-19ilr9m\&quot;&gt;Enter your email address &lt;/div&gt;&lt;/label&gt;&lt;input type=\&quot;email\&quot; id=\&quot;src-component-362114\&quot; aria-required=\&quot;true\&quot; aria-invalid=\&quot;false\&quot; aria-describedby=\&quot;\&quot; required=\&quot;\&quot; name=\&quot;email\&quot; class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-11bty1f\&quot;/&gt;&lt;/div&gt;&lt;button type=\&quot;submit\&quot; aria-live=\&quot;polite\&quot; class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f\&quot;&gt;Sign up&lt;/button&gt;&lt;/div&gt;&lt;/form&gt;&quot;,&quot;styles&quot;:&quot;&lt;style data-emotion=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-global 0\&quot;&gt;&lt;/style&gt;&lt;style data-emotion=\&quot;email-signup-iframe njjzu0 de6my7 17gkgdc lxzyg5 19ilr9m 11bty1f 1wosa0f\&quot;&gt;.email-signup-iframe-njjzu0 div{font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:0. 875rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;}.email-signup-iframe-de6my7{font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;color:#121212;}.email-signup-iframe-17gkgdc{display:-webkit-box;display:-webkit-flex;display:-ms-flexbox;display:flex;-webkit-flex-direction:row;-ms-flex-direction:row;flex-direction:row;-webkit-align-items:flex-start;-webkit-box-align:flex-start;-ms-flex-align:flex-start;align-items:flex-start;-webkit-box-flex-wrap:wrap;-webkit-flex-wrap:wrap;-ms-flex-wrap:wrap;flex-wrap:wrap;}.email-signup-iframe-lxzyg5{margin-right:12px;margin-bottom:8px;-webkit-flex-basis:335px;-ms-flex-preferred-size:335px;flex-basis:335px;-webkit-flex-shrink:1;-ms-flex-negative:1;flex-shrink:1;}.email-signup-iframe-19ilr9m{font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;color:#121212;position:absolute;overflow:hidden;white-space:nowrap;width:1px;height:1px;margin:-1px;padding:0;border:0;clip:rect(1px, 1px, 1px, 1px);-webkit-clip-path:inset(50%);-webkit-clip-path:inset(50%);clip-path:inset(50%);}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f{width:100%;box-sizing:border-box;height:44px;font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:400;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;color:#121212;background-color:#FFFFFF;border:2px solid #707070;padding:0 8px;margin-top:4px;height:36px;margin-top:0;}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:focus{border:2px solid #0077B6;outline:0;}html:not(.src-focus-disabled) .email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:focus{box-shadow:0 0 0 5px #0077B6;}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:invalid{box-shadow:none;}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:invalid[value]:not([value='']){border:4px solid #C70000;color:#121212;margin-top:0;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f{display:-webkit-inline-box;display:-webkit-inline-flex;display:-ms-inline-flexbox;display:inline-flex;-webkit-box-pack:justify;-webkit-justify-content:space-between;justify-content:space-between;-webkit-align-items:center;-webkit-box-align:center;-ms-flex-align:center;align-items:center;box-sizing:border-box;border:none;background:transparent;cursor:pointer;-webkit-transition:.3s ease-in-out;transition:.3s ease-in-out;-webkit-text-decoration:none;text-decoration:none;white-space:nowrap;font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;height:36px;min-height:36px;padding:0 16px;border-radius:36px;padding-bottom:2px;background-color:#052962;color:#FFFFFF;-webkit-box-pack:center;-ms-flex-pack:center;-webkit-justify-content:center;justify-content:center;background-color:#000000;-webkit-flex-basis:118px;-ms-flex-preferred-size:118px;flex-basis:118px;-webkit-flex-shrink:0;-ms-flex-negative:0;flex-shrink:0;margin-bottom:8px;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:disabled{cursor:not-allowed;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:focus{outline:0;}html:not(.src-focus-disabled) .email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:focus{outline:5px solid #0077B6;outline-offset:3px;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:hover{background-color:#234B8A;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:hover{background-color:#333333;}&lt;/style&gt;&quot;,&quot;newsletterId&quot;:&quot;this-is-europe&quot;,&quot;successDescription&quot;:&quot;We'll send you This is Europe every week&quot;}" clientonly="true">Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. after newsletter promotionWhy Ursula von der Leyen is the ‘world’s most powerful woman’ | Caroline de GruyterRead moreItaly’s Meloni, by contrast, demands that the EU act as a single economic power with a common industrial policy and joint funding to match. Of course, she hasn’t overnight become a European federalist. She simply understands that Italy’s national interest lies in a united response. Her Europeanism is the rational consequence of Italy’s fragile financial and geopolitical position. When EU leaders meet for a summit on 9-10 February, she will demand a common European climate policy, a common migration policy and a common plan for Africa. Meloni’s reasoning on green investment applies to all EU countries. Divided, the 27 are bound to be bullied by foes and friends alike – the American Inflation Reduction Act is the clearest reminder of that. Without unity, the EU’s role as a world leader in the fight against climate change all but withers away. Allowing Meloni – who until recently was branded a fascist – to pass as the advocate of a united Europe is the undesirable consequence of protectionist thinking in Paris and Berlin. European governments have a historic opportunity to join Washington in delivering a planetary industrial green strategy to prevent climate chaos. Their plan could embrace the 44 countries of the newly launched European Political Community, thereby including the UK and Turkey. Asia, Africa and Latin America could be included in the conversation early on to avoid replicating in the global south the industrial theft that the US is accused of inflicting on Europe. The EU lobbied the US to join the climate struggle and wanted the new rightwing Italian government not to sow discord and division. On both accounts, it got its wish. It’s now time to deliver. The Green party shares power in Germany and Macron stands as a driver of European integration. Will they now pull Europe together around an ambitious climate plan, or will they let Meloni grandstand as the new Macron? Lorenzo Marsili is a philosopher, activist and founder of European Alternatives and Fondazione Studio Rizoma. He is the author of Planetary Politics: a Manifesto Governing parties do not become oppositions overnight. Well, strictly speaking, they do. Come an election, regimes fall between polls closing at 10pm on Thursday and ousted leaders conceding on Friday morning. But there is a more gradual transition to opposition as a state of mind – an exhaustion of the will to govern and a dissolution of discipline into factional rancour. That journey precedes an election defeat but also makes one more likely. MPs lose hope of victory. The leader runs out of inducements to loyalty. Attempts to show strength fail, advertising weakness instead. Voters smell decay and recoil from the source. Even the government’s supporters start to anticipate defeat as a euthanising mercy. How far down that path have Rishi Sunak’s Tories travelled? Where is the point of no return?Conservatives comfort themselves that little of the present was foreseen in the past, which suggests that electoral decimation is not fixed in their future. Labour MPs intone the same mantra to ward off complacency. Years of volatility, the submersion of what used to be “normal” politics by Brexit and the pandemic have bred expectation of the unexpected. But ambitious Tories aren’t betting on a fifth term in government. The list of MPs who are quitting parliament at the next election includes rising stars (Dehenna Davison), mid-career ministerial midfielders (Chris Skidmore) and seasoned frontbench veterans (Sajid Javid), among others of all ages and factions. A related trend is high-profile figures branching out into the media. Jacob Rees-Mogg and Nadine Dorries have done deals to host their own chatshows on GB News and Talk TV respectively. They haven’t done that to support the prime minister. Preening populism is a competitive market. Success depends on generating news and stirring controversy, which means making trouble for the government. The box office demands blue-on-blue action. Sunak has been in Downing Street now for 100 days, which is more than double the time Liz Truss spent there but still short enough for it to feel premature to write him off already. A case for optimism was made at a recent cabinet away day at Chequers by Isaac Levido, Sunak’s campaign strategist (who is paid to think of reasons why the cause is not lost), and, over dinner, by William Hague (speaking as a survivor of lost Tory causes).The 100-day test for new leaders and why Rishi Sunak is flunking it | Andrew RawnsleyRead moreHope of a Conservative revival rests on the softness of Labour support – people are not excited by Keir Starmer – and the precedent of 1992, when John Major pulled off a surprise victory over Neil Kinnock. Hague also reminded his audience what happened next: descent into sleaze, perpetual rebellion and landslide defeat. There are plenty of scenarios between the polls of 1992 and 1997, and no reason why voters in 2024 should faithfully re-enact battles that were fought on a different political landscape in a bygone century. It is true that the current leader of the opposition lacks Tony Blair’s easy magnetism. The spectre of 1992 might not feel current enough to lift Tory spirits but it still spooks the hell out of Labour, and Starmer still looks more like a man creeping up on power than one striding purposefully towards it. Labour MPs privately concede that their poll lead describes flight from the Conservatives more than attraction to an opposition platform that few could articulate in bullet points. But it is easily forgotten how much that was also true in the mid-90s. The scale of Blair’s victory was amplified by demoralised Conservative supporters staying at home and Liberal Democrats picking up votes from people who were focused on getting the Tories out. Fewer people voted Labour in 1997 than had voted Tory in 1992 (13. 5 million versus 14. 1 million).An underappreciated ingredient for Labour success is lack of public horror at the prospect of Starmer entering Downing Street. He doesn’t have to make pulses race as long as he doesn’t make stomachs turn or skin crawl, which has been a problem with his recent predecessors. In that context, Starmer’s style – sounding like a headteacher stepping into a school in special measures – might be the right one, or at least the one that works best within his limited performance range. He has been a big disappointment to those craving socialist evangelism or denunciations of Brexit. Their frustration might depress Labour’s vote share, but not in ways that do the Tories much good. A shortage of eager Starmerites will be a weakness in government, when unpopular decisions have to be taken, but it is not an insurmountable obstacle to being a government-in-waiting. Especially not when the governing party is practically begging to be put into opposition. Starmer’s base is not among politics fans who wear their colours with tribal pride. It is the quiet voters in the middle who are tired of ideological adventures and polarising spectacle. He can satisfy a taste for government that is benignly boring and doesn’t induce despair or eye-rolling dismay. Sunak recognises that appetite, which is why on his first day in the job he promised a new era of integrity and professionalism. The subsequent 99 days have shown that his party has other ideas. They can’t agree on what good government involves for long enough to put on a display. There is a faction that thinks Liz Truss’s economic policy – tax cuts financed by imaginary growth projections – was not a disaster but too much of a good thing that financial markets found hard to digest. There is also a camp that thinks Boris Johnson was blameless in his own downfall, traduced by cowards and traitors. That makes a significant cohort of MPs who think their leader is an agent of decline and a leader who thinks the blockage to recovery is found on his own backbenches. It is not a unique affliction, but nor is it a syndrome that can be resolved in office. The obstruction is no mere question of policy or direction. It goes deeper, entwined and embedded in the guts of the party. It can’t be loosened without electoral intervention. It needs voters to flush the lot of them out of power. Rafael Behr is a Guardian columnist We now live in a time when energy firms talk like celebrities who’ve just lamped someone at the Oscars, or been covertly filmed making racist remarks. On being confronted with the fact that debt collectors in its pay are breaking into the homes of vulnerable customers to forcibly install prepayment meters, British Gas yesterday summoned the full force of theatrical contrition to wail: “This is not who we are.”You’ll note that statement conforms to the ironclad rule of the this-is-not-who-I-am apology, in that its precise opposite is true. This is, demonstrably, precisely who British Gas are, given that this is what they do. “It’s not how we do business,” explained the firm, faced with an overwhelming stack of evidence that this is indeed how they do business. As one debt collector trainer cheerily enlightened a new recruit during the Times investigation into the practice: “That person could tell you that their entire family of 50 were in a horrific aeroplane crash and were the sole survivor, and we’d still be saying: that’s a shame, but we are changing your meter.” The bailiff workforce seems to have absorbed this central ethical message. “If every single mum that starts getting a bit teary you’re going to walk away from,” reasoned one, “you won’t be earning any bonus.” How can it not be the way you do business, if doing it is literally incentivised?Admittedly, it’s not how British Gas present the way they do business to the outside world. The firm’s website and social channels confront users with a perky message: “We’re tooled up to help bring bills down.” For whatever reason, they omit to mention that the tools are a mortise pick, a mass-issued warrant, and a guy who prefaced setting a locksmith on the door of a single father-of-three by telling the undercover reporter: “I love this bit.” (Whether this man is the biggest tool in the British Gas shed is a matter of debate. I imagine the field is hotly contested.)Energy regulator launches British Gas investigation over prepayment metersRead moreThe chief executive of the energy regulator, Ofgem, yesterday condemned the practice of forcibly entering people’s homes and switching them to prepayment. He also opened an investigation into British Gas, warning: “No energy CEO can shirk their legal and moral responsibilities to protect their own customers, especially the most vulnerable.”And yet they can, as everyone from charities to Citizens Advice to a select committee inquiry has been highlighting for a long time now. Perhaps in their submissions to this inquiry, British Gas-contracted bailiffs will claim they are in fact engaged in divinely appointed “moral” work, much in the same way a serial killer argues they are simply cleansing the streets of sex workers once they’ve used them. Surprisingly, that’s not currently the line the firm is going with. If warm words could heat homes, British Gas could do itself out of business. As for who else is looking busy, the business and energy secretary, Grant Shapps, last week wrote a letter to energy companies ordering them to stop the practice. Ironically, for firms that deplore their own demands being ignored, they seem not to have opened it. Maybe companies that decline to engage with the secretary of state’s envelopes could be forced to prepay their taxes? British Gas expects to increase its earnings eightfold this year. Naturally, those unopened ministerial demands are not the only irony in town. Yesterday, Shell reported global profits of $40bn (£32. 2bn), the highest in its 115-year history. The announcement served as a reminder that our government’s longtime refusal to consider extending the windfall tax was opposed, among others, by Shell itself. Last October the firm’s then chief executive Ben van Beurden told the Energy Intelligence Forum that governments needed to tax firms such as his to protect the poorest. “You cannot have a market that behaves in such a way … that is going to damage a significant part of society … I think we just have to accept as a society – it can be done smartly and not so smartly. There is a discussion to be had about it, but I think it’s inevitable.” The then chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, finally took not-especially-smart action in the autumn statement; the government always being the last to know. Energy bailiffs for the poorest, huge profits for the richest: this is Britain in 2023 | Gaby HinsliffRead moreBefore we conclude, it must be said that British Gas is far from the only firm forcibly fitting prepayment meters, often while people are out at work, and shockingly often in the case of disabled customers who rely on electrically operated equipment to manage their lives. Many firms are driving these already vulnerable people on to prepayment meters, where the rate is disgracefully and unjustifiably higher. This is simply inhumane. The fact that it has continued despite the resultant anguish being highlighted is a sign that something much bigger than the bond between a company and an individual customer is broken. This week the US president, Joe Biden, called for a “junk fee” prevention act, reasoning: “You shouldn’t have to pay an extra $50 to sit next to your child on the plane, pay a surprise ‘resort fee’ for a hotel stay, pay $200 to terminate your cable plan, or pay huge service fees to buy concert tickets”.I know it involves taking a vague interest in how people actually live, but you’d think it was even more of a priority for someone in our own government to say that poor people really, really shouldn’t have to pay more for electricity via prepayment meters. If they can’t even get a grip on that part of the problem, let alone the iceberg it’s the tip of, then mounting evidence suggests it might be time for a number of parties in this story to concede: “This actually is who we are.” Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist I’m not usually a fan of police dramas. After 30 years working for the Metropolitan police, in a career that spanned working in firearms, hostage situations, murders, riots and domestic violence, I’m usually frustrated with how inaccurate TV portrayals are of policing (I know, this is sad). But then Happy Valley has come along again, and instead of resisting, I decided to watch it. What have I learned? Aside from the fact that unrealistic police procedures still abound on television (mobile phone data analysis missed; a survivor of a kidnapping and sexual assault joining the force and being allowed to work in the area in which the offences recently occurred), what struck me most was that the writer, Sally Wainwright, and the BBC commissioners have grasped something the police still haven’t: that diversity matters. I was the only person of colour out of 300 new officers when I joined the force in 1983, and you could count on one hand the number of Black and Asian chief superintendents even when I retired in 2013. What a joy it was to see Ramon Tikaram playing Ch Supt Praveen Badal in Happy Valley – the man in charge of the Basic Command Unit that Sarah Lancashire’s lead character works for. It is worth noting that currently the Met does not have a single BCU commander of colour. Although I did notice that in series two the wardrobe department got his shoulder epaulettes wrong – superintendent instead of chief superintendent – it is still thrilling to see this representation on screen. Sgt Catherine Cawood (played by Lancashire), meanwhile, is a lesson in the realities of policing, and showing how it should be done. Take her monologue in the opening scene of the first season of Happy Valley. She is speaking to Liam, a young man standing on a park climbing frame who is threatening to set himself alight. “I’m Catherine by the way,” she says. “I’m 47, I’m divorced, I live with my sister – who’s a recovering heroin addict – I have two grownup children. One dead and one who doesn’t speak to me.” It is brilliant, and human. It also shows how police officers, like so many of us, have challenges in our private lives that can cause conflicts of interest. A lowly sergeant, but Happy Valley’s Catherine Cawood is top of the cops | Rachel CookeRead moreBut these can also make us better at our jobs. Catherine saves the young man long before the highly trained hostage negotiator (in my experience, usually a white man) arrives. In season two, Catherine has been awarded the Queen’s police medal – nominated by senior officers. Serving senior officers would do well to look at this episode and reflect on it – far too often awards like this go to their senior officer mates, rather than rank and file on the frontline. As part of their homework, senior officers might mull over the beginning of season three to see what hardworking officers really think of them. We see Catherine being met by a senior officer and a pathologist from the Home Office, who ask her, laughing, “What’s his favourite sandwich?”, when she gives them details about a body dredged from a reservoir. She retorts with full details of who the body is, based on her deep knowledge of the community and the fact she’d nicked him once so would recognise his teeth anywhere. She leaves the men agog, muttering under her breath “twats” as she walks off. Then we come to the storyline of Catherine being investigated over racism after an Asian officer is encouraged to apply for a fictional role working on alien spacecraft that senior command have asked her to appoint for. This demonstrates how police leadership not only often fails to apply common sense, but as a result gets embroiled in bureaucracy while ignoring the glaringly obvious. Take, for example, the number of Met officers accused of racism, and the epidemic of sexual violence perpetuated by male officers towards women, both in their private lives and at work. Rampant homophobia in the police, meanwhile, is leading to the tragic loss of young lives. Troubled forces, the Met included, could learn a lot from programmes such as Happy Valley. I was told 40 years ago, working for the Met, that I was naive and did not understand how the world worked when I wanted to see senior officers of colour. Well, I do not apologise for criticising the glacial pace of change in the police. If the writer of Happy Valley and the BBC can see clearly what the next generation of the police and its leaders should look like, why can’t forces such as the Met do the same? Dal Babu is a former chief superintendent in the Metropolitan policeDo you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here. Love finds many expressions, but its sole certainty is that it always ends. This inescapable reality underpins much of human culture: what is most art, music, theatre, cinema and television other than an attempt to grapple with the emotional turmoil that results?A devastating new contribution to this artistic tradition finds an unlikely home in episode three of the new HBO series The Last of Us. Unlikely, because it is based on a popular video game, set in an apocalyptic alternative universe in which most of humanity has been reduced to zombie-like cannibals. What remains of our species is confined to totalitarian quarantine zones and desperate raiding parties. This is not conventionally fertile ground for romance. But – beware, lots of spoilers here – it is the setting for an extraordinary queer love story which defies cultural precedents. Bill is a conspiratorial survivalist who finds unfortunate vindication when civilisation collapses. When Frank – a survivor trying to make his way to Boston – falls into one of the many traps on Bill’s fortified compound, Bill reluctantly takes him in for a shower and meal. They fall in love and spend nearly two decades of bliss together: growing fresh strawberries, playing music, doing up the house, shielded from the violent ruin of human civilisation. Mortality eventually intrudes. Frank develops a degenerative illness and insists on taking his own life, but Bill decides they will die together, and they do, in each other’s arms in a locked bedroom. Queer representation has undoubtedly improved in recent years. Traditionally, queer men often appeared in popular culture as desexualised, one-dimensional clown-like figures, or as tragedies. Bill and Frank’s story does end in tragedy, but not because of their sexual orientations: their lives and deaths are, in fact, far more dignified than most in their world. Netflix’s stellar school romcom Heartstopper was obviously very different, but it similarly presented queer youth and offered them the possibility of happiness, rather than simply tragedy. The Last of Us recap episode three – absolutely magical televisionRead moreIn his suicide note, Bill writes: “I used to hate the world and I was happy when everyone died. But I was wrong, because there was one person worth saving.” In the old, civilised world, he lacked meaning in life; it took the apocalypse to find it, thanks to the love of another man. Why is this such an important and compelling storyline for queer people? When a young queer person comes to terms with their sexuality, they’re often stricken with panic because the simple roadmap seemingly offered to their straight counterparts – find someone, settle down, have kids, grow old together – vanishes. Images of loneliness fill the void. So when popular culture offers space for meaningful same-sex love – with all its complications – it matters. This episode could be seen as a cultural test: can a deep love affair in which sexual orientation is a background hum, rather than the foregrounded mood music, make it? If same-sex love is no big deal in the zombie apocalypse, a milestone of normalisation has been passed. There’s something moving, too, about how the men are middle-aged – and, no disrespect to the actor playing Bill – not blessed with conventional good looks. But they happily grow old together. Gay male culture is often guilty of glorifying youth and unrealistic body images. Most gay men don’t see themselves in such ordinary representation – it’s striking how rare this portrayal of queer companionship in old age is. The director of the episode suggests he actually tricked the audience into watching a queer love story by not making its same-sex nature immediately clear, drawing viewers in so they could later realise “it’s just the same love” they feel as heterosexuals. Of course, love is felt just as powerfully among same-sex couples as it is among straight people. It does often express itself differently, though. And representations of queer love in popular media should reflect that truth. For some gay men, wider cultural acceptance meant securing respectability. Others felt that if we were banished from heterosexuality, we might as well abandon its norms and start again. For instance, gay men are far more likely to be in open relationships and to have multiple sexual partners. Because promiscuity among gay men has such negative connotations, there’s a fear – among straight and queer artists alike – that presenting this other reality will simply invite bigotry. But these non-monogamous relationships are often full of love and emotional commitment, no less so than Bill and Frank, and deserve to be explored fully. Similarly, watching a gay man push his dying partner in a wheelchair evokes another singularly queer experience of love, but a tragic one: the HIV/Aids pandemic, where lovers became carers and torturous deaths awaited, all against the backdrop of an unforgivingly bigoted society. Bill and Frank build their own world free of the judgment of others – even if that world is as doomed as any other. There is one universal facet of love, regardless of sexual orientation, explored in this remarkable episode, and that’s fear. Bill tells Frank that, before he came along, he didn’t feel fear: but now with something to lose, he did. That kind of fear defines the human experience more than we would like to admit. But for many queer people, a greater terror has always lurked: what if life will be defined by rejection and solitude, of sleepless nights in empty beds?In truth, there is no shortage of Bill and Franks, condemned to love each other, living lives of joy, tenderness, fear and grief, just like everybody else. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnist In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123, or email jo@samaritans. org or jo@samaritans. ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders. org. Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here. A couple of weeks ago, at a moment of huge frustration over Chancellor Olaf Scholz’s foot-dragging on allowing Europe’s German-made Leopard tanks to go to Ukraine, a Ukrainian friend WhatsApped me a satirical mockup on “Scholzing”. Next to a photograph of the chancellor, it defined Scholzing, dictionary-style, as: “verb: communicating good intentions only to use/find/invent any reason imaginable to delay these and/or prevent them from happening”. I found this sharp and amusing, quickly retweeted it, and thought no more about it. My Twitter account seemed to be buzzing, but then I’d been writing a lot about the issue myself. Six days later, I was watching an interview with Scholz on Germany’s ZDF television channel when the interviewer confronted him with “Scholzing”, attributing the coinage to “a British historian”. I went back to my Twitter feed to find that this one quick tweet had been viewed 1. 1m times. In German and international media, the definition was being widely quoted as mine. Since, as we all know, the internet never lies, it has now become a historical fact that I thus defined “Scholzing”. (I had incautiously tweeted the meme directly from WhatsApp, so it didn’t show up as something sent from Ukraine. I subsequently clarified this on Twitter, but of course no one reads the clarification.)I asked my Ukrainian friend if he knew who was actually behind this satirical mockup. He didn’t, but Ukrainians have been using the word for months. Already last June, a tweet from @biz_ukraine_mag reported that “to ‘Scholz’ is now an accepted term in Ukraine meaning to continually promise something without ever actually having any intention of doing it”.Still and all, the reactions have been interesting. One of the editors of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Germany’s leading conservative paper, wrote a semi-humorous editorial commentary in which he said that “our English-speaking friends” would be better advised to reflect first on “Bidening, Trumping, Trussing and Johnsoning, not to mention Harrying and Meghaning”. The clear implication, albeit lightly expressed, was that we Anglo-Saxons should mind our own business. (By contrast, I would welcome any German satirical swipe at Johnsoning, although support for Ukraine happens to be the one and only issue on which Boris Johnson deserves respect.) Since, however, the coinage comes from Ukraine, not the UK, this little German-Anglosphere sideswipe need bother us no longer. PS re 'Scholzing'(which, contra @ZDF presenter, isn't my invention; a Ukrainian friend sent me the meme which I found amusing so tweeted)Scholz here reinterprets 'Scholzing' as 'Germany does the most'. If only that were true. Of course it's still the US. https://t. co/85o5P0lYtN— Timothy Garton Ash (@fromTGA) January 26, 2023Much more significant was Scholz’s own response on ZDF’s What now …? programme. Having dilated on the amount of support Germany has given to Ukraine, he said, in what had every appearance of being a line prepared with his spin doctor, “the translation of Scholzing is ‘Germany is doing the most’”. It’s true that German support for Ukraine has indeed been very considerable, as you would hope from the democracy with the biggest economy in the EU and the most extensive ties to eastern Europe. Yet to say “Germany is doing the most” is not merely self-satisfied, even self-righteous, but also self-evidently false. It’s the United States that has done the most. Indeed, for all the amazing courage and skill of the Ukrainian armed forces, were it not for the scale and speed of US military support much more of Ukraine might today be occupied by Russia. So really we Europeans – all of us, Brits very much included – should be reflecting on why it is that, nearly 80 years after 1945, we still rely on Uncle Sam to defend European soil, European freedom and European security. Meanwhile, a huge tragedy is unfolding before our eyes. What we – and democratic Germany more than anyone – swore after 1945 would “never again” (Nie Wieder!) happen is happening again: a European country is subjected to a war of terror that has clearly genocidal aspects, including multiple atrocities committed against civilians, dehumanising rhetoric and forced Russification in occupied territories. Some 14 million Ukrainians have fled their homes. I recently attended a funeral of young soldiers in Ukraine, spoke to some of their wounded comrades, heard the wrenching tears of a refugee from Mariupol. Now a new Russian offensive seems imminent. More people will be killed, maimed, orphaned, marked for an entire lifetime. In such a situation, time is of the essence – and delay makes time work for Putin. Don’t be fooled: Germany’s U-turn on sending tanks to Ukraine is a reluctant one | Jan-Philipp HeinRead more“Scholzing”, in the sense of careful, slow, managerial decision-making, is fine in peacetime economic policymaking, but it gives the other side the advantage in war. (In fairness, one should note that there are a few Scholzers inside the Biden administration, and more in some other European capitals.) It would have been possible to start preparing a European Leopard initiative six months ago. Germany would not have been “going it alone”. It would have been at the heart of a European concert of nations. This would have been true “European sovereignty” in practice – and welcome German leadership. Nobody knows what will happen on the battlefield this year, but one quite probable result of the slowness and hesitancy exemplified by the German chancellor is a kind of escalating stalemate, with ongoing trench warfare resembling that of the first world war. When the shooting war eventually winds down, there could be a semi-frozen conflict, with Russia hanging on to a significant part of the territory it has occupied by force since 24 February 2022. At home, Putin could then claim a kind of victory, a historic reconquest of at least part of Catherine the Great’s Novorossiya (New Russia), thus also extending the life of his tyranny. His example would encourage Xi Jinping to have a go at Taiwan, driving an even bigger nail into the coffin of a “rules-based international order”. In short, this would be the negation of everything democratic Germany has stood for. These are the real stakes, the reason “Scholzing” is no laughing matter. I believe passionately that Germany should be in the lead, not the rear, in a shared, Euro-Atlantic effort to end the largest war in Europe since 1945 in the only way that will bring lasting peace. If the term actually came to signify “Germany is doing the most” – meaning also acting fast and decisively – I would be the first to sing hymns of praise to Scholzing. If only it would be true. Timothy Garton Ash’s Homelands: A Personal History of Europe is published in March There is no joy in it for those who always knew Brexit was a con, but it is finally dawning on more and more people that leaving the EU was a colossal mistake. Those who led the project still talk the same old nonsense about the purported benefits of Brexit, but they, like most government assertions these days, sound like echoes of a bygone time. In reality, Brexit’s arrival has caused supply chain disruptions, staffing shortages, higher food prices and extra red tape for business. Public opinion is shifting towards remorse. Instead of hurtling away from the EU into the swaggering prosperity promised by the Leave campaign, Britain is instead receding into a dark timeline of recession, strikes, and political instability. Last week, it was forecast that Britain will be the only G7 economy to shrink in 2023. When it comes to questioning why Britain is in such trouble, leaving the EU is now given as one of the standard reasons – as though it were an exogenous event that struck the country like an asteroid and smashed it out of orbit. Around the world, Britain is now twinned with Brexit as an identity, an island plagued by its hubris. “Brexit has cracked Britain’s economic foundations”, a CNN headline declared late last year. “Blankets, Food Banks, and Shuttered Pubs: Brexit Has Delivered a Broken Britain”, said Foreign Policy last week. It’s understandable that such a huge event should become the only lens through which the country is seen, both internally and externally. But the truth is that Britain was broken way before Brexit. Brexit did not break the housing market, so that stock is low and housing so unaffordable that the average first-time buyer in London had a deposit of £150,000 last year, and recent rises in interest rates will be passed on from buy-to-let landlords to tenants. Brexit did not create the need for food banks, the use of which increased by more than 10 times between 2010 and 2014. Brexit did not weaken the regulators’ hand so that energy companies could make their largest profits in over a century, and not even be taxed properly for it. Brexit didn’t slash NHS funding. Brexit did not ideologically brainwash Liz Truss so that she, in a matter of days, sent the pound to its lowest ever level against the dollar. What Brexit did was heap pressure on a country already struggling with weak public infrastructure and stagnant wages, mainly by limiting the labour market and diminishing volumes of trade. Obviously, two huge events – the war in Ukraine and the pandemic – have happened since Brexit, and contribute in their own ways to economic pain and the strain on public services. But they both arrived in a country already compromised in its ability to deal with price shocks, supply chain disruptions and widespread illness. Brexit also did not make our politicians less capable, or more mendacious and prone to culture-war posturing and misinformation. Britain had been stewing in an anti-immigration sentiment that went unchallenged for years, spawning Ukip and Nigel Farage, who did more to secure the anti-immigrant Brexit vote than the Conservatives ever did. Brexit did not write scores of tabloid front pages scaremongering about immigrants and Muslims. And Brexit did not make our left-of-centre politicians mealy mouthedwhen it came to challenging xenophobia. Their punishment was to be devoured by it. It is because Britain was breaking that Brexit happened in the first place. It was a necessary, phantom new road to prosperity when all other roads had reached a dead end. In that sense, it has been a success. Because when it did happen, the shock was so huge that it diverted attention away from all the reasons that it had come about in the first place. To those who opposed Brexit, leaving the EU was not only a political event, it was an emotional and cultural one too: a physical wrenching from a liberal fraternity, perpetrated by liars and charlatans and maybe even shady foreign influence. The feelings Brexit inspires are understandably strong. But they are also broadly wasted when their purpose is merely to reverse Brexit, to fixate on Brexit as a uniquely calamitous event that is bringing about Britain’s decline, rather than a secondary cause of that decline. Think of those angry years between 2016 and 2019, when People’s Vote marches swelled the streets of London. The campaign for a second referendum, always more an expression of frustration than a viable goal, was striking in its ability to marshal people and funds, which were then frittered away by scattering the opposition to the Tories – the architects of Brexit – at a time when uniting against Boris Johnson’s party in the 2019 election was crucial. In constantly drawing our eyes towards it, Brexit is both the result of Britain’s failings and a smokescreen for them. It has become an obsession of two extremes: those who believe we will not prosper until Brexit is allowed to flourish, and those who believe will never prosper unless Brexit is vanquished somehow, even if that is just to extract a political expression of the fact through urging Keir Starmer to admit that it has been a failure. In the middle, another feeling – fatigue – dominates, which forecloses any more examination of why Brexit came about. Brexit was always the wrong answer to the right question that millions across the country were asking. How do we regain a sense of identity, community, prosperity and security in our future? Or, to put it in the cynical language of Brexiters (and now Starmer): how to take back control? The less cynical subtext to that question is this: how do we regain control at a time when employment, healthcare and housing are increasingly uncertain, when industries have been shuttered and community organisations defunded?These are the questions that the right still seeks to exploit. See Liz Truss’s statement, even after epic failure, that she merely wasn’t given enough of a chance because “the general consensus is that Covid-19, Brexit and the Russian invasion of Ukraine are the only factors that have influenced our economy” making “departure from the status quo” not “politically feasible”.Starmer can try to flip and reclaim “Take back control”, if he likes. It’s cute. But if it doesn’t provide its own departure from the status quo, then we have learned nothing, and the uncertainties that brought about Brexit will endure, to be exploited again. Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnist Today’s Brexit anniversary marks three years of political mayhem and economic calamity. It is also 50 years since Britain joined the EEC. Ten years ago this month, David Cameron made his shameless Bloomberg speech pledging a referendum to placate his party and Ukippers, who he had previously called “fruitcakes”, “loonies” and “closet racists”.Cameron wrongly thought Brexiteers could be appeased, but they proved insatiable. The more harm their Brexit does, the more extreme versions they demand, chasing those impossible phantasms they mis-sold to the country.“Remoaner” was a clever Brexit epithet for the 48% of us who voted remain. The heartbreak of this act of national self-harm left remainers keening in grief, in a long moan for the loss of an ideal, along with certain economic decline. The ache, too, was over the broken old Labour alliances of interest and belief, cities against towns, old against young, those with qualifications against those with few. With the sorrow there was rage, white-hot and vengeful, against cynical Brexit leaders who knowingly sold snake oil and fairy dust. Grief ebbs when looking to what comes next. David Lammy, the shadow foreign secretary, last week promised there would be a civilised friendship with Europe under a Labour government. There was talk of reconnecting “a tarnished UK” with its closest allies, “for security and prosperity”; “reducing friction” on trade; unblocking the Horizon scheme; strengthening student links and pledging a “clean power alliance”.But there is to be no rejoining, no way back to the customs union or single market, Labour says, so as to deny Tory strategists what they yearn for: a re-run of Brexit at the next general election to distract from the economy, the cost of living crisis and collapsed public services. Distressed Labour rejoiners point to how many leavers are now Bregretters. With this rapid shift still ongoing, the pollster John Curtice says that 57% of people are in favour of rejoining, with just 43% for staying out, while 49% think Brexit weakens the economy. Remainer grief eases at signs of a country reuniting against the liars who pulled off this trick. But it’s rash to imagine that even a 14-point lead means a pro-EU referendum would be won: we know what referendums do. Besides, egocentric Britain forgets that Brussels, with a war on its doorstep and its own economic woes, might shun yet more negotiations with the UK. Let’s not forget the MEPs and envoys we insulted them with, the spite and mendacity spread by the likes of Nigel Farage and Daniel Hannan in the European parliament or David Frost across the negotiating table. There is some cheer: these polls cause such alarm to the Brexit mis-leaders that they are the moaners now – the Bremoaners. Hannan, the ex-MEP and arch-purveyor of Brexit fabrications, is trying to scare defecting Brexit voters back. “There really does seem to be a plot to overturn Brexit,” he warns Telegraph readers. He uses Lammy’s speech as evidence, plus Labour’s resistance to the EU deregulation law. “There is little doubt the Europhile blob is giving it a go,” he writes, “to hold Britain within the EU’s regulatory orbit pending an attempt at re-entry.”He also warns: “For their plan to have the slightest chance of success, they need to convince the country that Brexit has been an economic disaster.” But that ship has long sailed. Look what Brexit has done: a 4% shrinkage in long-run productivity relative to remaining in the EU, expects the Office for Budget Responsibility, inflation is higher than in the EU, trade has fallen by almost a fifth, while the government itself says the much-trumpeted Australian deal will raise GDP by less than 0. 1% a year by 2035. Brexit has raised food prices by 6% says the LSE, while draining the workforce. Eurostar also deliberately leaves a third of seats empty due to crippling EU/UK border delays. The Brexit press can’t hide these inconvenient truths. Jeremy Warner, the Telegraph’s associate editor, challenges Jeremy Hunt’s bizarrely Pollyanna-ish assessment of the economy, writing “trade with our European neighbours is faltering badly,” due to Brexit, with “the rather awkward fact that the UK is the only G7 economy yet to recover to its pre-pandemic size”. “The grim reality is that the country seems to be falling apart on almost every front” and “car production has fallen to its lowest since the 1950s”.All that is why Prof Matthew Goodwin says that “Bregret is taking hold in Britain” with only one in five thinking it’s going well. Brexiters are now the minority, Bremoaning like hell because no amount of Brexit boosterism will bring back those lost supporters who know exactly whom to blame. Few will agree that their pet project has failed because it wasn’t “hard Brexit” enough. Eventually extreme Brexiters will subside back into their irrelevant coterie of cultists, unforgiven and moaning all the way. skip past newsletter promotionSign up to This is EuropeFree weekly newsletterThe most pivotal stories and debates for Europeans – from identity to economics to the environment &lt;/div&gt;&lt;/label&gt;&lt;div class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-17gkgdc\&quot;&gt;&lt;div class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-lxzyg5\&quot;&gt;&lt;label for=\&quot;src-component-406663\&quot; class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-0\&quot;&gt;&lt;div class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-19ilr9m\&quot;&gt;Enter your email address &lt;/div&gt;&lt;/label&gt;&lt;input type=\&quot;email\&quot; id=\&quot;src-component-406663\&quot; aria-required=\&quot;true\&quot; aria-invalid=\&quot;false\&quot; aria-describedby=\&quot;\&quot; required=\&quot;\&quot; name=\&quot;email\&quot; class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-11bty1f\&quot;/&gt;&lt;/div&gt;&lt;button type=\&quot;submit\&quot; aria-live=\&quot;polite\&quot; class=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f\&quot;&gt;Sign up&lt;/button&gt;&lt;/div&gt;&lt;/form&gt;&quot;,&quot;styles&quot;:&quot;&lt;style data-emotion=\&quot;email-signup-iframe-global 0\&quot;&gt;&lt;/style&gt;&lt;style data-emotion=\&quot;email-signup-iframe njjzu0 de6my7 17gkgdc lxzyg5 19ilr9m 11bty1f 1wosa0f\&quot;&gt;.email-signup-iframe-njjzu0 div{font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:0. 875rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;}.email-signup-iframe-de6my7{font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;color:#121212;}.email-signup-iframe-17gkgdc{display:-webkit-box;display:-webkit-flex;display:-ms-flexbox;display:flex;-webkit-flex-direction:row;-ms-flex-direction:row;flex-direction:row;-webkit-align-items:flex-start;-webkit-box-align:flex-start;-ms-flex-align:flex-start;align-items:flex-start;-webkit-box-flex-wrap:wrap;-webkit-flex-wrap:wrap;-ms-flex-wrap:wrap;flex-wrap:wrap;}.email-signup-iframe-lxzyg5{margin-right:12px;margin-bottom:8px;-webkit-flex-basis:335px;-ms-flex-preferred-size:335px;flex-basis:335px;-webkit-flex-shrink:1;-ms-flex-negative:1;flex-shrink:1;}.email-signup-iframe-19ilr9m{font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;color:#121212;position:absolute;overflow:hidden;white-space:nowrap;width:1px;height:1px;margin:-1px;padding:0;border:0;clip:rect(1px, 1px, 1px, 1px);-webkit-clip-path:inset(50%);-webkit-clip-path:inset(50%);clip-path:inset(50%);}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f{width:100%;box-sizing:border-box;height:44px;font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:400;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;color:#121212;background-color:#FFFFFF;border:2px solid #707070;padding:0 8px;margin-top:4px;height:36px;margin-top:0;}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:focus{border:2px solid #0077B6;outline:0;}html:not(.src-focus-disabled) .email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:focus{box-shadow:0 0 0 5px #0077B6;}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:invalid{box-shadow:none;}.email-signup-iframe-11bty1f:invalid[value]:not([value='']){border:4px solid #C70000;color:#121212;margin-top:0;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f{display:-webkit-inline-box;display:-webkit-inline-flex;display:-ms-inline-flexbox;display:inline-flex;-webkit-box-pack:justify;-webkit-justify-content:space-between;justify-content:space-between;-webkit-align-items:center;-webkit-box-align:center;-ms-flex-align:center;align-items:center;box-sizing:border-box;border:none;background:transparent;cursor:pointer;-webkit-transition:.3s ease-in-out;transition:.3s ease-in-out;-webkit-text-decoration:none;text-decoration:none;white-space:nowrap;font-family:GuardianTextSans,Guardian Text Sans Web,Helvetica Neue,Helvetica,Arial,Lucida Grande,sans-serif;font-size:1. 0625rem;line-height:1. 35;font-weight:700;--source-text-decoration-thickness:2px;height:36px;min-height:36px;padding:0 16px;border-radius:36px;padding-bottom:2px;background-color:#052962;color:#FFFFFF;-webkit-box-pack:center;-ms-flex-pack:center;-webkit-justify-content:center;justify-content:center;background-color:#000000;-webkit-flex-basis:118px;-ms-flex-preferred-size:118px;flex-basis:118px;-webkit-flex-shrink:0;-ms-flex-negative:0;flex-shrink:0;margin-bottom:8px;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:disabled{cursor:not-allowed;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:focus{outline:0;}html:not(.src-focus-disabled) .email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:focus{outline:5px solid #0077B6;outline-offset:3px;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:hover{background-color:#234B8A;}.email-signup-iframe-1wosa0f:hover{background-color:#333333;}&lt;/style&gt;&quot;,&quot;newsletterId&quot;:&quot;this-is-europe&quot;,&quot;successDescription&quot;:&quot;We'll send you This is Europe every week&quot;}" clientonly="true">Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. after newsletter promotion This article was amended on 3 February 2023 to exclude – in the context of Brexit – a reference to the subsequent high UK energy price, relative to that of the EU. As a linked-to analysis noted, the UK’s own energy policies have significantly driven UK energy prices. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist After the mayhem, after Liz Truss blew up the economy, the only way was up. Things could only get better – or so you would have thought. But Rishi Sunak’s 100 days to steady the ship have left him and his party clinging to a life raft. Yesterday the half a million public servants out on strike were largely backed by voters unwilling to see the pay of nurses, teachers and the rest fall behind inflation and below the private sector. Today the Bank of England foolishly raised interest rates to a shocking 4%, steering into the headwinds of recession while the IMF predicts only the UK will fall back while all others grow. With food prices up 17%, and mortgages and rents rising again, the Bank hopes unemployment will rise too: it may be independent, but a strong Keynesian steer from government would have deterred this austerian folly. Fewer than 100 days remain before Sunak faces the electorate’s verdict in May’s local elections. No one has voted for him. His own party doesn’t like him: Sunak is near the bottom of ConservativeHome’s ranking of cabinet ministers and prominent Tory MPs by party members, at just 2. 9% approval: about the same as Dominic Raab. Sunak falls behind Keir Starmer on every polling measure, from best to run the economy to best prime minister. How bad is this? Only Truss ever fared worse. This will not lead to a repeat of John Major’s 1992 turnaround: politics professor Rob Ford points to Major’s 100th day neck-and-neck with Labour polling, while Sunak is 25% behind. True, Sunak was dealt a bad hand, but look how badly he plays it. It’s no use proclaiming integrity, then appointing a seedy cabinet of shifty rogues, bullies, tax dodgers and retreads instead of fresh new faces. “Sir” Gavin Williamson? Nadhim Zahawi? Suella Braverman? Grant Shapps? Really? He is held captive by the caucuses and cabals he must balance, and backers he must reward, stymied by contradictory imperatives of his fissiparous backbenches while he dithers over sackings, blown by the winds for lack of direction. He stands firm only on his greatest blunder, with no exit plan. Obstinately refusing to negotiate, he makes unions the reasonable ones, ready to talk turkey so long as some raise is on the table. This is not economics, not holding down inflation as he claims, but pure politics, which is not his forte. If he thinks he can drive strikers into submission through abject penury, it won’t happen – and if it did, the shame would be on him, and the sympathy with them. Mini-me Thatcher imitation is no route to success 40 years on. That’s because economic truth is on the unions’ side: Paul Johnson, the director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies, says firmly to me that a public sector pay rise “is not in itself inflationary”: there are no prices to rise, unlike in the private sector. What’s more, he says, the sums involved to pay public workers are small from a total pay bill of £240bn. Each extra 1% costs £2. 5bn. He gives a good example of relative costs: if the “temporary” cut in fuel duty is restored, that raises £6bn, “enough to pay NHS staff and teachers a raise around the inflation rate”. If Sunak prefers a £6bn bribe for the fuel lobby, that’s his political choice. That will underline his image as an obtusely wrongheaded, anti-public sector austerian, while nurses and teachers flock away from their professions: where are his extra maths teaching coming from?Most perplexing is Sunak’s inertia on the NHS perma-crisis. It was unthinkable for previous governments to expect to survive 1,000 people a week dying needlessly (not counting Covid deaths), with up to half of those attributed to A&amp;E delays, according to analysis by LCP Actuaries. Just one case used to cause an uproar: Mavis Skeet’s needless cancer death in 2000 propelled Labour into supercharged NHS investment. If Sunak relies on Stalin’s maxim that “one death is a tragedy, a million is a statistic”, Rob Ford tells me this will be radiation poisoning of the Tories’ reputation, “a sickness lasting years to come, a folk memory of the time the ambulance never came for Grandad.”Sunak refuses to say the word “crisis”, when he should have called a national emergency long ago. This would mean organising Cobra meetings every day, giving staff immediate pay rises, getting funds poured into social care, summoning volunteers on deck. Never mind that by doing that he admits to 13 years of cuts – he could have seized the initiative. But that’s what he lacks, in a nothingness that goes far deeper than eager-to-please smiles. The idea of a vital “first 100 days” came from 1933 and Franklin D Roosevelt’s first 77 laws and project investments to kickstart a dead economy. Sunak can boast only a malevolent anti-strike law, U-turns on windfarms (good) and housing targets (bad).Looking ahead, he has no vista beyond five bog-standard governances - to calm inflation and attempt to patrol borders and cut NHS waiting times. This week’s Institute for Government report on the civil service is dire. Can he fix the Northern Ireland protocol without a DUP or backbench rebellion?Only three seats in Britain now have a majority in favour of Brexit, according to a new poll. “Give us something to fight for,” the former Brexit minister David Frost demands, but they’ll be fighting one another as Boris Johnson and Truss gird their loins for God knows what. Sleaze, cronyism and corruption inquiries are in progress, but nothing else progresses, while the US and EU outdo each other in massive green investments, excluding us. Welcome to the dog days, and yet more lost growth to come. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist The prospect of a televised competition that pits knife- and blowtorch-bearing children against one another is not exactly a relaxing one. And so, for years, I stuck to the adult version of The Great British Bake Off, for fear of seeing a nine-year-old set themselves on fire or experience the disappointment that was already devastating enough on the face of a 46-year-old banker from Brentwood. But, deep into one of the lockdowns, I gave it a go, and found I had been entirely wrong – this was, in fact, the Bake Off that the format was born for, and it would change my outlook on more than just baking. Where the adult competition is now populated by quasi-professionals, the bakes in the junior tent (whose latest series concludes on Friday evening) are often hideous, usually inedible, and only very occasionally impressive. The two hosts – Ravneet Gill and former adult Bake Off contestant Liam Charles – deserve some kind of television award for eating them all without gagging. (Then again, they are also responsible for choosing the challenges – you want to eat multiple rounds of glutinous frogs poached in syrup? Cooked by children? Really?) And yet despite the lurid mush they regularly serve up to the judges, these children appear to be made of steel. There are occasional tears, and downcast moments, but they bounce back instantly – they are, as it turns out, far more resilient than their adult counterparts. On coming seventh out of seven bakers in a challenge, this season’s Poppy shrugged and said: “At least I didn’t come eighth!”Junior Bake Off contestant Imogen and presenter Harry Hill in series four. Photograph: Mark Bourdillon/Channel 4 / Love ProductionsGranted, Rav and Liam’s feedback errs on the generous side, but that still doesn’t explain these children’s ability to gesture at a haggard “mosaic biscuit diorama” not even their own mother would eat and declare it to be “excellent”. It’s common for a contestant to stare down the barrel of the camera and declare that, given they came last today on almost every metric, they are resolved to be star baker – the best baker in the tent – tomorrow. No shame, no fear, no humility. “I am making my jam,” one contestant narrated this season, “which is the best jam in the world.”Our junior bakers’ wonderful efforts depicting their heroes in bread. Featuring a special teacher, Captain Sir Tom Moore, baker and YouTuber ‘Cupcake Jemma’, two Frida Kahlos, an inspirational uncle, and Everton’s @ToniDuggan. #GBBO pic. twitter. com/ia1K0qQQpo— British Bake Off (@BritishBakeOff) January 12, 2022Yet the more that I think about it, the less surprising it is. One thing most children get in spades is failure – the expected learning curve at age nine is steeper than anything we face as adults. Children attempt things they’ve never done before all the time, such as learning the English language from scratch, or algebra, or whatever “jazz tap” is. They’re used to getting things wrong, and being told they’re brilliant anyway. Yes, children on a baking show might not be representative of their cohort – but if anything you’d think their high-achieving ways would make them more sensitive to the hard knocks of a national competition, where someone has to win and everyone else has to lose. Perhaps as a result of their cast-iron confidence, the junior bakers are more generous than the adults, too. Contestants help each other, sometimes before their own bakes are even finished. “Don’t worry, you can do this!” rings out across the tent as four children crowd round a bench to finish off someone’s piping. The upper age limit has only recently been brought down from 15 to 12, yet none of the children seemed to notice the unfairness of small children competing against teens twice their height, who could feasibly be their babysitter. Well done to our Bread Day Star Baker - nine-year-old Annabel! Her ‘Jasper’s Naughty But Nice, Cinnamon and Carrot Rolls’ Showstopper - in honour of her dog - was hailed by Rav as the best bread she’s ever had on Junior Bake Off! 👏👏 #GBBO pic. twitter. com/ckVe9RxyRc— British Bake Off (@BritishBakeOff) January 25, 2023As the children make mistake after mistake, covering themselves in food dye and creating haunting bread likenesses of Captain Tom, I regularly find myself lost in admiration. I love baking, but can easily tip into perfectionism or obsession: it’s a chemistry more than an art. You can’t throw in a pinch of this, or a pinch of that. You have to follow the recipe. Tell that, though, to Charlie, who, on realising he had added “all the salt” rather than a teaspoon, shrugged and said: “Well, this is going to be quite salty now.” Tell that to Fyn, who added a whole pot of chilli power to his bread dough, “gassing out” everyone in the tent, and later told an interviewer he found the whole thing “super-funny”. (“I had to remake it,” he added, in case you were in any doubt.) In this context, it’s more than a little embarrassing that I, as an adult woman, can spend a whole day mourning an unset mousse. I’m not sure when they teach us to fear failure so much, to give imperfectly completed, insignificant tasks the power to upset us. Maybe it’s in the envelope when they hand out GCSE results. But for the corrective you need, switch on Channel 4 at 5pm. And then whip yourself up a garish, collapsed, enthusiasm-filled cake. Barbara Speed is a Guardian Opinion deputy editor Britain’s once-famed welfare state seems unable to deliver. Public services are riven with conflict and starved of funds. Nothing works. Yet there the argument ends. The government defends the status quo, the opposition claims it is all about money. The Treasury rules. Reform ossifies. Progress is zero. Scratch the surface of this week’s strikes and it is clear that each of the services has suffered from a longstanding absence of constructive reform. The triaging of health treatment is plagued by bottlenecks. Home care of elderly people is withering. School teaching is oppressed by obsessive examinations. Housing policy is led by builders’ lobbies, not by housing need. Energy policy has become obscene, even to the most ardent advocate of privatisation. So what should change? The answer is desperately opaque. Everyone agrees that the NHS is fine in principle but no longer fit for purpose at the frontline. Britain’s drug laws have not changed in half a century, and are now so unenforcible that drugs dominate urban crime and imprisonment. While Germany, Portugal, California, New York and Vancouver can tackle drugs reform, Britain is in a state of frozen impotence. As for the constitutional future of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, it is near unbelievable that federal systems can allay separatist sentiment across all of Europe yet be anathema to Westminster politicians. The most remarkable period of domestic reform in modern times took place in the late 1960s, under Harold Wilson. The home secretary, Roy Jenkins, managed in just two years to stop hangings, decriminalise homosexuality in England and Wales, permit abortion (although it was not decriminalised in Northern Ireland until 2019) and drastically ease divorce. He went on to abolish theatre censorship and initiated the banning of sex and race discrimination. It was an astonishing period. Crucial to each of Jenkins’s reforms was not support from public opinion – many were fiercely opposed – but a consensus of informed liberal debate. This was led by a series of royal commissions that had preceded him, notably into homosexuality, divorce and crime. Britain was transformed from one of the most archaic nations in Europe into that of the swinging 60s. Jenkins said in his memoirs merely that he felt “civilised reform to be the duty of a Labour government”.There is no shortage of ideas for reforming public services, but there lacks a conveyor belt to turn them into policy. An explosion of partisan thinktanks has, if anything, led to a decline in consensus building. Just as parties rely more on “their” thinktanks – which all boast their influence to their backers – so their opponents do likewise. There is little likelihood of the Centre for Policy Studies (Tory) joining hands with the Resolution Foundation (Labour) in agreeing a grand reform of housing, health or crime. Roy Jenkins canvassing in south London with Labour candidate Harry Lamborn in 1972. Photograph: David Thorpe/ANL/Rex/ShutterstockThe media duly exaggerates this partisanship into full-blown polarisation. Every opposition editorial, every BBC interview, ends in “more money surely”. Last month a number of senior politicians – including the Tories’ Sajid Javid and Labour’s Wes Streeting – did bravely moot NHS reform. Some suggested eroding “free at the point of delivery” with means-tested payments, others collaboration with the private sector or a change in GPs’ contracts. The result was a torrent of abuse and counter-abuse from their respective backwoods. The result is nothing. Independent health thinktanks such as the Nuffield Trust and the King’s Fund are left crying in the wilderness. Likewise, any move towards the legalisation and regulation of drugs falls foul of Tony Blair’s terror of what the tabloids would say. Housing policy is dominated not by a concern for homeless people – who cannot afford their own thinktank – but by a construction lobby obsessed with nimbys and housing ladders. As for any hope that Keir Starmer might imitate Wilson in the 1960s, all his advice apparently screams no. Mimic Blair. Don’t frighten the horses. Just insult Rishi Sunak and anything he might say. Maintain heat, not light. Faced with this policy desert, a recent paper from the library of parliament boldly suggested a return to the tradition of the royal commission. No fewer than 400 commissions guided the great age of British reform from the 1830s to the 1900s, as such inquiries did Jenkins’s 1960s programme. Commissions are not thinktanks but adjudicators of thinktanks, digesters of evidence. Their conclusions may be only as good as their members, but they are supposedly above the partisan fray. They are above all concerned simply with the question in hand. Royal commissions have declined since the 1980s because Margaret Thatcher hated them for taking too long – some as much as two years – and thus impeding action. She had no problem with speed of reform. In addition, many recent ones had been on aspects of the constitution, such as local government (1969), devolution (1973) and press freedom (1977), where agreement was hard to achieve, even when the reports were well informed. But all of them promoted open-minded debate. They elevated rather than depressed politics. At present, we know only that reform of the public sector is not working. Debate is corrupted by party politics and duly gets nowhere. Something needs to change. So bring back the commissions and put them to work – fast. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist At Winchester college, the alma mater of Rishi Sunak, students can take classes in wood carving and sculpture, perform on a proscenium stage at the school’s 240-seat theatre, or make use of the 2,000 books in its art library. The story is very different at state schools, which have seen a steep reduction in arts provision over the last decade. “The moment that convinced me to go on strike was when my school lost its specialist art teacher,” one striking teacher wrote in this newspaper last week. “Activities such as art [and] music … are the highlight of the week for a lot of pupils, but they’re the first to go when resources are short.”English state schools are facing a creativity crisis. Since 2010, enrolment in arts GCSEs has fallen by 40% and the number of arts teachers has fallen by 23%. This shift is most pronounced among state schools in deprived areas, where pupils are far less likely to sing in a choir or play in an orchestra. Meanwhile, private schools have invested substantial resources in art and music provision, according to research from Warwick University. This depressing trend is part of a wider and self-reinforcing pattern. As fewer state students have the opportunity to engage with arts or music, fewer go on to study these subjects at A-level or university. The risk is that arts subjects will be restricted to a privileged few, shrinking the cultural horizons of everyone but the elite. Art makes a person broader-minded and more imaginative. Yet the government’s bleakly utilitarian attitude to education has narrowed the opportunities available to state school students. Artists and teachers have long railed against the English baccalaureate, the system introduced without consultation under the former education secretary Michael Gove in 2010. The Ebacc excludes all arts subjects. It is also the bedrock on which a school’s Progress 8 score is based, which determines its place in performance tables. This gives schools an incentive to focus on “core” subjects – English, maths and sciences. Independent schools are not bound by these rules or performance tables, and are free to do what they deem best for their pupils. Cuts have made this picture worse. In the 10 years after 2009, spending per pupil in England fell by nearly 10% in real terms. As support staff have been cut, overstretched teachers have less capacity to run choirs or put on school plays. Although the government announced an additional £2. 3bn in school funding in last year’s autumn statement, most of this will be eaten up by the growth in school costs. Because arts subjects require space and resources, they are often most vulnerable to budget cuts. In their 2019 manifesto, the Conservatives promised a £110m arts premium to help schools fund arts programmes and extracurricular activities. This was whittled down to £90m in Mr Sunak’s 2020 budget. He promised this money would arrive by September 2021. But it has still yet to materialise. The investment that private schools have made in arts provision refutes the notion, favoured by Conservative ministers, that education is simply a training ground for the labour market. But even on a purely economic basis, the government’s approach to arts education is self-defeating. In a recent speech, the chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, noted that the cultural industries had grown at twice the rate of the UK’s economy over the last decade. Tackling the creativity crisis in state schools is a matter of urgency, both for pupils and for the country as a whole. Rishi Sunak’s reshuffle is about both tightening his grip on power and putting more departments on the Treasury list for re-education. By splitting up the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, which had challenged Mr Sunak when he was chancellor, the prime minister has decapitated a rival economic policymaker in government. The new Department for Business and Trade will have some clout because its cabinet minister is Kemi Badenoch, a darling of the Tory right. During her bid to become Tory leader, Ms Badenoch seemed to think that government intervention lies at the heart of everything that is wrong with the British economy. Giving her a ministry designed to use state power underlines the nature of the political coup taking place. Theresa May, Boris Johnson and Liz Truss all in very different ways railed against the economic orthodoxy imposed by the Treasury, tapping into Brexiters’ claims it was behind “project fear”. What previous leaders were upending was the legacy of George Osborne, the former chancellor who made austerity economics the organising principle of Tory politics. Mr Sunak’s elevation to Downing Street has revived Osbornomics. What his reorganisation also represents is the restoration of banking perspectives in government. Ms Badenoch, an ex-banker, and Lucy Frazer, a former corporate barrister put in charge of a new slimmed-down culture department, represent that trend. Tying both shifts together is the rise of Greg Hands to be party chair. A former City trader, he was one of Mr Osborne’s most trusted Treasury lieutenants. Mr Hands’ arrival as the party’s cheerleader-in-chief suggests that Mr Sunak is pursuing an ideologically driven agenda that he hopes can be sold as economically necessary. Electoral calculations are never far away. Michelle Donelan, like Mr Hands, voted to remain. With a “blue wall” seat at risk from Lib Dems, her new job as cabinet science supremo gives her a media profile and a position likely to appeal to socially liberal voters. Perhaps the biggest winner from the reshuffle may be Labour’s Ed Miliband. He gets a whole new department – energy security and net zero – to shadow and a high-profile cabinet minister, Grant Shapps, to joust with. Reshuffling his ministers and creating new departments will not solve Mr Sunak’s problems. The Tories have appointed a dozen people to be culture secretary in the past 13 years and are on their ninth business secretary since 2010. Ms Frazer’s move sees England get its sixth housing minister in a year – suggesting the issue isn’t a Conservative priority. The structural features of the economy as the result of financialisation – rising private debt, regional imbalances and insecure low-paid work – are not being seriously addressed despite the rhetoric on levelling up. Michael Gove refusing to be moved suggests the Treasury won’t get its way in every fight. The Tory party remains factional and mutinous. It may be a high-risk act of conciliation to make a divisive critic party vice-chair. But promoting some new faces and rewarding loyalty in others gives Mr Sunak a better shot at leading Conservative MPs. Most prime ministers dislike sacking their colleagues. Mr Sunak is no exception. His shake-up leaves in place Dominic Raab, the justice secretary, pending the outcome of an inquiry into allegations of bullying. Mr Raab may be gone in weeks. If he does depart, he will be the third minister to leave Mr Sunak’s cabinet in just a few months. Rather than an embarrassment of riches, too many Conservatives who make it to the top are offering the government an embarrassment. It is hard to imagine anything worse than the Real IRA’s bombing of the market town of Omagh on 15 August 1998. It was the deadliest single atrocity of the Troubles in Northern Ireland. The 29 people who were slaughtered that day included toddlers, primary school kids, teenage girls volunteering in the Oxfam shop and a young woman who was pregnant with twins. Yet for those left behind, and for the 220 people injured that day, there was in fact one thing worse: the tormenting thought that it could all have been prevented. The bereaved and the survivors have had to live with the haunting possibility that the police and the intelligence services could have saved them from this unspeakable calamity. Only now, with the announcement by the Northern Ireland secretary, Chris Heaton-Harris, of an independent inquiry into what the security services knew in advance of the attack, can they hope to lay those ghosts to rest. The inquiry should have been established 20 years ago. In December 2001, Nuala O’Loan, then the police ombudsman for Northern Ireland, published a report on what the Royal Ulster Constabulary may have known before the Omagh massacre. Her remit did not go beyond the RUC, and O’Loan could not investigate the British intelligence services or indeed the police across the border in the Republic, where the bomb was prepared. Yet even this limited perspective revealed some very disturbing evidence. On 4 August 1998, 11 days before the bombing, the RUC received an anonymous telephone call warning that there would be an “unspecified” terrorist attack on police in Omagh on 15 August 1998. The caller gave a detailed account that identified two putative attackers by name. The officer who took the call was convinced that the informant was genuine. This warning was given to special branch, but never passed on to the relevant divisional commander in Omagh. According to O’Loan: “When he was shown the intelligence two years later, on the anniversary of the explosion, he said he would have set up vehicle checkpoints.” Those checkpoints would probably have blocked the bombers. Three days before the bombing, a reliable informant, known as Kevin Fulton, who spied on the IRA for MI5, told his handlers that the Real IRA was about to “move something north over the next few days”. Fulton had earlier told them that a known associate of the Real IRA “smelled of fertiliser”, which was used in making the bomb. While the car bomb was being moved into position in Omagh on 15 August 1998, a call was made from this same man’s mobile phone to one of those later thought to have been responsible for the atrocity. No attempt was made to assess this intelligence, let alone act on it. Records of the handler’s meeting with Fulton seem to have disappeared from the special branch files. Likewise, when a review of the RUC’s own handling of the Omagh case was conducted in 2000, these warnings were initially withheld from the investigators. The record of the anonymous call was specifically marked as “Intelligence does not refer to Omagh”.Nuala O’Loan delivers her report into the Omagh bombing in December 2001. Photograph: Paul Faith/PAMost egregiously, we know that intelligence reports relevant to the atrocity were never passed on to the police team that was supposed to be bringing the perpetrators to justice. O’Loan identified at least 280 such documents, and believed there were probably more. Does any of this really matter? None of it changes the essential truth that the massacre was the work of a gang of IRA dissidents seeking to destroy the peace deal created a few months earlier through the Good Friday agreement. None of it can now make up for the failure to convict anyone for this horrendous crime. (The Real IRA leader, Michael McKevitt, who was almost certainly involved in the Omagh bomb, was convicted in the Republic for the less specific offence of “directing terrorism”.)It matters, though, for two big reasons – one human, the other political. First, there is the pain of the bereaved and the injured. It is unconscionable that their suffering has been deepened both by the failure to bring the perpetrators to justice and by what looks very like a covering up of information that would help them to understand what happened. They should not have to wade through waters that have been deliberately muddied. The demands of basic decency aside, however, there is a wider political context. The refusal of the state for more than 20 years to engage with the aftermath of Omagh is part of a wider failure to deal with the legacy of the Troubles. O’Loan’s report appeared shortly after a much more spectacular terrorist atrocity, the 9/11 attacks in the US. Tony Blair, who was then prime minister, was “moving on” from Northern Ireland to other (disastrously ill-conceived) missions. Raising awkward questions about the uses and abuses of intelligence became, in the run-up to the Iraq war, increasingly undesirable. This neglect of duty by Blair has turned, under Conservative governments, into active hostility to truth-seeking. The Omagh families are finally getting an inquiry because the high court in Belfast recognised that they have a right under the European convention on human rights to a proper investigation of their loved ones’ murders. But ending the UK’s adherence to the ECHR is an obsession of the Tory right. Even worse is the government’s Northern Ireland Troubles legacy and reconciliation bill, now before the House of Lords, which seeks to close down all further criminal and civil actions related to crimes committed during the Troubles. It will even shut down inquests – 23 of which are pending. The vindication of the Omagh families after more than two decades of official obfuscation is a reminder of why the ECHR is necessary – without transnational standards of human rights, the UK’s duty to stand up for its own citizens can be brushed aside. And the concession of an inquiry into Omagh contradicts the British government’s belief that “reconciliation” can be achieved by burying the pain of the Troubles. Every bereaved family has the right to know as much of the truth about how their loved ones died as can be recovered from the pit of shame, amnesia and evasion into which so much of it has been cast. Whether the perpetrators were loyalists or republicans, soldiers or police, the agony of not knowing is the same. Only a comprehensive truth recovery process in which immunity from prosecution is dependent on honest accounting for what was done to the victims can stop the past from being a living torment. So long as that imperative is postponed, ghosts will continue to haunt the land. Fintan O’Toole is a columnist with the Irish Times Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here. The results of the genetic test didn’t really come as a surprise. My mum died of breast cancer in her mid-30s, and I’d recently had it confirmed that my great-grandma on her side had it on her death certificate too. Yet when I was diagnosed with triple negative breast cancer last year – the most likely to be linked to a gene mutation – I hoped against hope that it wasn’t inherited. In part because of what it means for my relatives, in part because of what it means for my children and their children, and in part because I didn’t like to think that what I was going through now had been pretty much inevitable from the minute I’d been conceived, and I’d made no effort to find out about it. Only between 5% and 10% of breast cancers are believed to be hereditary, but if you have a mutation in either the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene, your chance of developing the illness involves some much bigger percentages. With the BRCA2 mutation that I have, the chance of developing breast cancer by the age of 80 is about 70%; in the general population of women, the chance is just 12-13%. With the mutation I carry, I have a 50% chance of passing it on to my children. Until last year, I had no idea of this. I could have known – the information is out there. But, despite what happened to my mum, I’d not really looked into it. And no one had really suggested I should – except my grandma. She insisted I got checked out after suffering a breast abscess when I had my son in 2010. I had a mammogram and met someone who asked me about my family history. At that point I only knew for sure that my mum had died of it; my grandma and her sister were still fighting fit, and it was decided there was nothing to worry about. Three years later came Angelina Jolie’s revelation that she had the BRCA1 gene, and had decided to have a double mastectomy. The story topped the news, and was written about for days afterwards. Despite what happened to my mum, I’d not looked into it. And no one had really suggested I should – except my grandmaI thought about it fleetingly. Should I ask a doctor if I could, or should, have a test? But I was more concerned about what I would do with the information. Would I have to declare it to insurers? Currently you don’t need to disclose a positive test result, but I wondered if this might change. Would I ever want to have preventive surgery (the double mastectomy that Jolie chose was, and still is, the only option)? And, I suppose, I was concerned about what the information would do to me. If I didn’t have surgery, would I panic at the first sign of a twinge? Would I live under the shadow of the worry? Would I make myself ill in some other way as a result? Would it make the decision to have more children more stressful?So I carried on, blithely ignorant. And by the time I saw the stats, there was a 100% chance I’d got it. Now, of course, I look back and wonder why I didn’t do things differently. Given my mum’s age when she died, I should have qualified for NHS testing, but I didn’t know that. Even having experienced cancer, I’m not sure I would have wanted a mastectomy at first. If I’d found out I had the gene in my 20s, I’d have wanted to know the chance of getting cancer in my 30s and 40s, not just by the time I was 80. Luckily, that type of information is available to people being tested now. If I had found out in 2010, when I had the mammogram, I would not have wanted preventive surgery because I hoped to have another child, and I wanted to breastfeed again. But I could have accessed regular screening. During Covid, there was a chance of it being cancelled, so I could have ended up in the same position I am in now. But there’s also a chance I would have had my cancer picked up earlier, and that would have meant less of the worry and pain it has caused. I was in physical discomfort by the time I went to the doctor, and when I was diagnosed, my immediate thought was that it had spread. For more than two weeks, while tests were carried out, I was convinced it had travelled to my brain, and that I was going to be told that I had just months to live. I could have avoided that heartache by knowing it had been caught early. I’m suddenly relieved to not have a daughter, but I know that my son has a 50% chance of having inherited the gene. If he has, it raises the chance of him having breast, prostate and pancreatic cancer in later life, and will no doubt bring him his own worries. But treatment is progressing at speed, so I hope that it won’t mean difficult decisions for him. So, too, is the support structure for people with the mutation. Before and after my test, I had phone appointments with the genetics team at Great Ormond Street hospital in London, and they talked me through what it all meant and offered referrals if I wanted to find out more. The cancer charities have lots of information for those affected, and around the country there are groups of people with the mutation who support each other. I haven’t joined one yet, but I plan to. Breast cancer patients get proton beam therapy on NHS in world-first trialRead moreFinding out about the mutation has been a blow, despite all the reasons I had to suspect it was there. But knowing has empowered me to make decisions about what happens next. After the genetic test results came back, I was offered a calculation of my chance of getting breast cancer again. The software said my risk of getting it again by the age of 80 was 81%, while the risk of it happening again in the next 10 years was put at 35%.With those odds, it’s no surprise that the doctors have recommended a double mastectomy. And, although it has still been a daunting thing to sign up for, the statistics suggest to me that it’s the right thing to do. I don’t want to put myself or my family through this again if I can help it, and 35% is too high for me. And it has empowered the people treating me – there are new, targeted drugs coming on track for people who carry the mutation and aim to stop the cancer coming back. Now that I know how powerful the knowledge is, and that there is support, I wish I hadn’t waited. Hilary Osborne is the Guardian’s money and consumer editor Though the full scale of the catastrophe is still emerging, the earthquake that struck Turkey and Syria in the early hours of Monday morning is already known to have been one of the most deadly in decades, claiming thousands of lives. A 7. 8-magnitude temblor is extremely powerful, and all the more damaging when it strikes at a relatively shallow depth and is followed by a second major shock. But even when disasters are natural in origin, their impact is shaped as much by human actions before and in the aftermath as they are by their inherent force. Poor and otherwise vulnerable people are almost always disproportionately affected. Photos and footage testify to the terrible destruction wreaked on the Turkish side of the border, where the highest death toll is currently recorded. Bitter winter storms have worsened the plight of survivors. Among the victims will be some of the 4 million Syrians who fled the war; many have been living in southern Turkey, often in overcrowded conditions. More remain in northern Syria, where war has pulverised homes and essential infrastructure, and traumatised the population. Millions have taken refuge in rebel-held Idlib, where most of them are dependent on aid. Then came the Covid-19 pandemic and a cholera outbreak, which a threadbare health service in Idlib – deliberately targeted by airstrikes – is struggling to handle. Fuel shortages and skyrocketing prices have deepened the misery. Now those battling with freezing temperatures and inadequate food have been left without even temporary homes. This is, as the International Rescue Committee has warned, “a crisis within multiple crises”.Turkey faces an immense challenge. It does so with trained and experienced rescue workers, due to its history of quakes, and support from 45 countries. Both rescue and relief efforts will prove far harder on the Syrian side of the border. Providing aid is likely to be diplomatically as well as logistically challenging. Its White Helmets have had to become expert at rescuing people from rubble. But they are in desperate need of search-and-rescue equipment, spare parts and fuel. The organisation also urged the international community to pressure Bashar al-Assad’s regime – and Moscow, which supports it – to hold back on airstrikes. Though conflict in Syria has faded from international attention, the complex regional struggle – not only of the regime against rebels, but of Turkey against Kurdish groups and Israel against Iranian-linked targets – continues to claim lives in the north and there are fears it could escalate. The mandate for Syria cross-border aid via Turkey has, thankfully, been extended until July. But, at present, Damascus allows it to enter via only one border point. It would be unconscionable if the others remained closed at this time of desperate need. Though the regime bears the primary responsibility for the suffering of its people, others must step up. Ankara’s attempts to accelerate the return of Syrian refugees would exacerbate the situation were they to continue. The humanitarian response plan for Syria was already severely underfunded; less than half of the $4bn needed has been provided – the lowest level since the crisis began. The need is all the greater now. Ensuring that aid reaches the most vulnerable will be difficult in the extreme. But every effort must be made. It would be not only tragic but shameful if the international community’s failures were to compound this disaster. In my 10 years on the NHS frontline, things have always been hard: staffing has always been a struggle, and beds have always been hard to come by. But now the situation is untenable. I cannot emphasise enough how dangerous things have become in 2023. Wards are so drastically understaffed that patient safety is at risk on a daily basis. I look after up to 12 patients on a shift. What that looks like in practice is managing 12 sets of medication, care plans and paperwork, updating 12 different families, and providing tailored care for 12 different people: signing forms for procedures, changing dressings, making sure they don’t become unwell, escalating concerns to the doctor. Making sure 12 different people are eating and drinking and using the toilet. I do this more or less single-handedly, because every other nurse and healthcare assistant on shift has 12 patients, too. The pressures we are facing are so inhumane that every single day I wonder if it will be the day that I’m going to make a mistake that costs someone their life. There was no lightbulb moment that pushed me towards strike action – it was more like death by a thousand cuts. I voted to take strike action last year without knowing if I would join the picket lines, but a recent shift convinced me it would be irresponsible not to stand alongside my colleagues. It was a busy day on the ward like any other; we were understaffed and fighting fires. As I looked down the corridor, I saw the only other nurse on shift – recently qualified, like me, with 12 patients on her list. We locked eyes and stood holding each other’s gaze for a second, both of us knowing we were drowning. At work, I’m somebody I no longer like very much. I focus on getting as much done as possible and freeing up beds. Patient-centred care is a distant memory. We are expected to be robots with no emotion. After a patient dies, within half an hour I am caring for somebody new in the same bed – there is simply no time for processing difficult days. Working with that level of anxiety and adrenaline for 12 hours on a weekly basis has consequences. At home I am emotionally and physically exhausted, with nothing left for my family. It is crushing knowing I am simply unable to give patients the standard of care they deserve, the standard of care I trained for. That’s not what I would want for myself, or my family members. There have been hard times before. During the pandemic, the fear on the ward was palpable. In March 2020, as the virus took hold, nurses cared for the dying without PPE. I remember wondering if I should say goodbye to my mum and dad. Since then, I have seen staff numbers nosedive and I can tell you why: our leaders, who once praised our superhuman efforts, seem to have amnesia. We are burned out and simply cannot continue. The health secretary tells us that if we do receive this pay award that we should be more productive. If I was any more productive, I’d be dead. Losing our art teacher was the final straw: I knew I had to strike for the sake of my students | James McAshRead moreIronically, taking action for me is not really about pay. I started in the NHS as a healthcare assistant after being a patient myself, and seeing the difference that nursing staff could make. I am immensely proud to work in nursing. But our current system sees patients as numbers, and nurses as cogs in the wheel. And it cannot continue. This dispute is about our dignity, and recognising our gruelling, daily service. I am striking because I want to see my profession respected. I am striking because if nurses continue to leave in their droves, who will be left to train the next cohort? I am striking because if we don’t see real changes, who will look after us when we are old? Maxine Wade is a nursing associate As told to Lucy Pasha-Robinson Last October, Rishi Sunak sat down beside Catherine Poole, a 77-year-old patient at Croydon University hospital, no doubt hoping for a breezy on-camera conversation. When Mr Sunak asked whether staff had looked after her “really nicely”, Ms Poole replied: “They always do. It’s a pity you don’t pay them more.” That sentiment seems to have hardened. Health workers in Britain began their largest strike on Monday and polls showed the public solidly behind them. The disputes will eventually be settled, but patients will suffer more the longer they go on. Yet it seems that Mr Sunak’s government is in no mood to end the quarrel. That is why Monday’s strike, the biggest in the 75-year history of the NHS, largely affected English health services. Walkouts have been suspended in Scotland and Wales after new pay offers. Ministers need to face up to reality. The NHS in England is in crisis. This might lend weight to the argument that the system is in crying need of correction, yet the health service in England was just reorganised under the Health and Care Act 2022 so that the NHS could plan “integrated” services – reversing a decade of pro-market reforms. Hugh Alderwick of the Health Foundation wrote perceptively last month that “these changes were introduced under Boris Johnson’s government. Two prime ministers later, Rishi Sunak and his health secretary, Steve Barclay, are emphasising patient choice of provider … to improve the NHS”. The Health Foundation’s polling shows that while public satisfaction in the health system has declined because of waiting times, support for its core principles – free at the point of use, available to everyone and funded by tax – remains as strong as ever. This faith in the egalitarian and redistributive health system is being tested by Mr Sunak’s parsimony. Overall health spending will now grow by 1. 2% a year in real terms over the next two years – less than in the decade before the pandemic (2% a year) and less than a third of the long term average (3. 8%). With the NHS unable to provide comprehensive cover, the private sector is moving in. Last year, in the richest parts of the UK, a quarter of all NHS elective care was being delivered by private providers. In the poorest areas, the proportion is more than a tenth. If wealthier areas see the biggest reductions in waiting times, then it would be another example of inverse care law – where health provision varies inversely with the need of the population served. Having to wait for care encourages people to try to jump the queue. In his forthcoming book, Shattered Nation, Oxford University’s Danny Dorling calculates that in 1980, about 0. 5% of GDP was spent on private health insurance. In 2021 it was more than 2%.Health spending is rising because we are living longer and there are more people with long-term conditions. It is also going up because medical advances allow us to live healthier and longer lives. Prof Dorling says that from the 1970s to 2015, people in 20 countries had longer life expectancy than Britons. By 2021 that was true in more than 30 nations. He argues that this “disturbing and sudden fall was not due to the pandemic; it was due to austerity”. It makes sense to spend money on things that improve our existence – unless, it seems, you are a Conservative minister. As I chatted away with a bride-to-be, gently dabbing blusher along her cheeks and lifting her lashes with mascara, I felt proud to have found a home within the beauty industry. But as time went on, the glamorous facade of working at makeup counters started to wear thin and what started as a love affair with the industry turned sour. I’ve always been a creative person and had been drawn to beauty since I was a teenager. But with most top makeup courses not covered by student loans and costing in the region of £20,000 for a year, formal training felt completely out of my grasp. Aged 18, I set my sights on working as cover staff on makeup counters instead, learning as much as I could about makeup techniques on YouTube in the meantime. Soon after, I got through the application process to work on counters in luxurious department stores. I was over the moon. The offer was accompanied by a strict dress code policy: a skirt, suit jacket, five-inch heels, red or nude nail varnish, a pearl necklace with matching earrings and red lipstick. The look was far from my usual aesthetic, but I’d been working in hospitality since the age of 16 and was excited to try a more glamorous look, even if it left me out of pocket. Standing behind the glossy, branded counters I felt proud of my appearance, and thrived helping customers to feel confident. I especially liked helping people feel more confident about their skin concerns. As someone who suffered from acne, I knew how a touch of foundation, or the right concealer, could make all the difference to your self-esteem. Working with makeup all day felt like a dream. It was exciting, challenging and I would look forward to moving to different brands each shift: Dior, Charlotte Tilbury, Nars or Laura Mercier – brands I dreamed of being able to afford that felt that little more attainable now I was earning a wage. But as my experience grew, so did the hours I was expected to work. My knees would tremble with pain from enduring a 12-hour shift in heels on hard marble floors. My feet would rub so raw in my shoes they would often bleed. I once tearfully asked my manager if I could change into flats – I was told I could go and buy some lower heels on my lunch break. Flats were banned unless you were injured, she said. So, left with no other options, I started inventing a foot injury just to be able to get through the day. Managers scrutinised my appearance in a way that completely blindsided me. Sometimes I would turn up to a counter with a full face of makeup, only to be given a mirror, hairbrush and different lipstick shade and told to make myself look more presentable. On other days, I would be congratulated for looking incredible, even though I couldn’t see a difference. The unpredictability fuelled insecurities about how I looked, and I started to dread turning up to work. The job, which had once ignited such passion and creativity in me, had became less and less about skill and more about my physical appearance. My colleagues could be cutthroat, too. Cover staff weren’t entitled to earn commission on sales, and full-time employees would regularly snatch products out of my hands so they could be rung up on the till under their IDs. Others would insist I redo my makeup or patronise me by asking if I knew what certain products were. The toxic atmosphere began to have an impact on my mental health and I started to withdraw into myself. I started being reprimanded for not being bubbly or outgoing enough, once even crying at the station after weathering yet more criticism. Another manager pulled me up on that too – employees shouldn’t be crying on the shop floor, she said. I never planned to quit the beauty industry. But four years after starting, one particular shift made me walk out for good. It had been a long day, and knowing I would be run off my feet, I had brought a bottle of water with me from home. My manager watched me as I went to retrieve it from the cupboard on my lunch break. “Are you looking for your water bottle?” she asked. I nodded as she opened the bin. “It’s in there. That’s what you get for bringing plastic on to my counter. I only accept glass,” she said. “You can get it out of the bin if you really want it.” That was the final straw that made me realise this job wasn’t worth sacrificing my mental health for. Ten years on, the level of scrutiny I received on my personal appearance continues to have an impact on my self-esteem. At a formative age, I was exposed to a toxic culture around beauty standards and I still find myself being overly critical about how I look. Walking back into department stores is enough to fill me with dread. I’m much more comfortable ordering online. For me, beauty has always been about so much more than appearance. I view makeup as a tool to enhance, empower and give confidence, but that balance is so easily shifted when it’s weaponised to determine your value. I still love makeup but quitting the industry has helped me feel much more in control of my image. Now, I recognise my value is so much more than how I look. Elizabeth McCafferty is a journalist who writes regularly for Guardian Experience Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here. The bookies will now give you even money on Labour forming a majority government at the next general election. So what kind of government would Keir Starmer’s Labour be?For the first two years of his leadership, this was a difficult question to answer. The party’s strategy focused almost entirely on presenting Starmer as neither-Boris-Johnson-nor-Jeremy-Corbyn. Policy barely came into it – except to jettison flagship Corbyn commitments such as nationalisation. So policy-phobic did Starmer appear that Radio 4’s Dead Ringers portrayed him as constantly astonished that it was possible to have any opinions at all. The view that no one knows what Starmer stands for still appears to be widely held. But in reality it should not be any more. Over the past few months Labour has adopted a host of policy positions, particularly on the economy. And they are considerably more radical than Starmer’s critics might have expected. Not that you would know this from the political demeanour of the leader or his shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves. Both have gone out of their way to emphasise Labour’s “fiscal discipline”: no spending pledges without showing how they will be paid for, a commitment to bringing down the national debt. Business leaders have been assiduously wooed. But look at the policies themselves, and, even where not yet wholly defined, they are far from timid. Take Labour’s fiscal stance. Reeves promises to abide by the “golden rule” that in normal circumstances governments should borrow only for investment. But that still allows for significant capital spending. Labour has pledged £28bn a year for climate action this decade – a larger annual figure than promised by Corbyn and John McDonnell. Under Ed Miliband’s stewardship, Labour pledges to achieve a net zero power system by 2030, establish a new publicly owned energy generation company and drive a 10-year, £60bn energy efficiency programme to fix Britain’s leaky homes and buildings, creating tens of thousands of new jobs and apprenticeships across the country. Aiming at the same time to tackle the UK’s abysmal productivity rate (considerably lower than that of Germany, France and the US) and a persistent trade deficit over the last 25 years, made worse by Brexit, Labour has recently published a new industrial strategy. For the first time this will focus not just on high-innovation sectors such as aerospace, but on the “everyday economy”, such as retail, transport, light manufacturing and services, seeking to raise productivity – and therefore wages – in the sectors in which most people work. Labour plans to use one of the very few genuine “Brexit freedoms” to target government procurement on UK companies. It wants to reduce the UK’s import bill and to strengthen the resilience of the economy in sectors such as food, health supplies and medicines, which were badly exposed in the pandemic. Reeves has further committed to establishing a national wealth fund to take equity stakes in Britain’s successful new businesses. Labour will also introduce significant economic devolution to ensure that the benefits of its industrial strategy flow to all parts of the country. Commentary on Gordon Brown’s recent report on constitutional reform focused mainly on abolition of the House of Lords. But arguably Brown’s more significant proposals are for local authorities to be given major economic powers and budgets to drive economic development across England, with new powers also devolved to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Starmer has promised to consult on Brown’s proposals, but with wide support among Labour council leaders and mayors, it is hard to see them being rejected. But will Labour’s “fiscal responsibility” inhibit its spending on public services? Perhaps not as much as some fear. Reeves has understandably been reluctant to say she will raise taxes. But she has also made clear her view that the unequal tax treatment of wealth is wrong. That suggests that Labour wants to equalise the tax rates paid on capital gains and dividends with those on wages, and possibly to charge national insurance on investment income. Reeves has already said Labour would abolish non-dom status. These measures would raise around £26bn a year, which would go some way to funding the party’s commitments to the NHS, social care and childcare – the social infrastructure on which the economy depends. At the same time Labour is committed to raising the minimum wage to the level of a proper living wage. Its package of workers’ rights and protections includes banning zero-hours contracts and bogus self-employment, and ensuring all workers from day one are entitled to sick pay, paid holidays and parental leave. It pledges to negotiate fair pay agreements with employers and trade unions, setting a floor to wages and working conditions in key sectors. Experience in other countries suggests that such agreements will not only raise workers’ wages, but reduce gender inequalities and help manage the difficult processes of technological change and productivity improvement. They would almost certainly reduce the likelihood of strikes. And it is not quite true that Labour is now opposed to nationalisation. It has promised to take the rail operators back into public ownership when their franchises expire. Labour has suddenly become a hot favourite, but the race isn’t won until election day | Andrew RawnsleyRead moreAll told, Labour now has a solid economic policy, and one which certainly cannot be characterised as “New Labour”. Its plans for industrial strategy, collective bargaining and workers’ rights are well to the left of anything done by Tony Blair and Brown. Its climate and energy programme is more radical than Miliband’s in 2015. Indeed, excepting nationalisation, it is not too far from the economic prospectus set out in Corbyn’s 2017 manifesto. We should not be surprised at this. There is a prevalent myth that Labour only wins from the centre. But this is a misreading of the party’s postwar history. New Labour was able to win from the centre because the economy was in the middle of a long boom, enabling the party to redistribute the fruits of growth to public services and poverty reduction. But when the economy is doing badly, Labour has always moved to the left, seeking more active interventions and structural reform. History provides a good guide as to when this move leads to electoral victory. It is at those epoch-shifting moments when Labour’s leader – Clement Attlee in 1945, Harold Wilson in 1964 – was able to present a progressive vision of the future: to show that the party’s economic programme was necessary to meet the profound challenges of the age. Labour’s economic programme is not yet as radical as theirs. But it is a serious response to the UK’s current economic weakness. Can Starmer follow history’s example? Michael Jacobs is professor of political economy at the University of Sheffield For those of us living and working in the north of Engand, it has become achingly clear that our transport system is broken. Long before any strike action was announced, the region’s public transport was suffering from creaking infrastructure, staff shortages and a daily dose of long delays and routine cancellations. For those of us who commute between northern cities by train, getting to work in decent time has become a game of chance. Others have become used to missing medical appointments and elderly relatives becoming isolated. It’s time Labour made a bold stance on transport, as part of its commitment to levelling up and transitioning to net zero. There is plenty of evidence to lay bare the regional inequality in transport spending. We know that if the north had received the same transport investment as London in the decade between 2009 and 2019, it would have received £86bn more than it did. A Labour win is now looking likely at the next general election, but at what cost? | Nesrine Malik Read moreAnd yet transport is usually the area of investment where politicians feel most comfortable. Within government, the transport models that sit behind spending decisions are considered the “gold standard”, reassuring ministers that investment will result in economic returns. Investing in transport is an opportunity for some visible “hard hat” progress, and even the Treasury agrees that efficient transport networks are the backbone of any economy. Investing in transport pays for itself – Transport for the North estimates that £70bn of investment in the north’s strategic transport plan could contribute an additional £100bn in economic growth. But it turns out that nothing has been certain in politics in 2022. Plans for HS2 and a full commitment to Northern Powerhouse Rail – comprising a new line from Liverpool through Bradford to Hull – have become political footballs, thrown and dropped by successive prime ministers. To break the current cycle of transport misery, Labour first must publicly commit to the principle that regional growth is our route back to national growth. The alternative is a dated economic narrative that supports spending in the places that are already more productive, like the south-east of England. As we’ve seen, this overheats the housing market, increases congestion and pollution thanks to more cars on the road, and will not fairly or sustainably change our country’s economic fortunes. Transport is a key driver of regional growth, and better transport would help communities in the north prosper. The next step for Labour would be to supercharge the work of their people already in power. The party has so far shied away from institutionalising the full force of its metro mayors across the country. At the gift of the government of the day, metro mayors are more often provided with capital budgets for transport, but less often provided with revenue to help reduce public transport fares. Capital investments pay for building or maintaining assets, while revenue spending is for day-to-day expenditure. A Northern train at Stockport station in November. Photograph: Christopher Thomond/The GuardianDespite this, there has been some progress at the local level already. Metro mayors, including Andy Burnham in Greater Manchester, introduced a £2 cap on single bus journeys earlier this year. Downing Street has now followed suit. Labour should support metro mayors and local transport authorities by providing them with greater flexibility to choose between capital and revenue spend, depending on local priorities, and financially support them to be bolder on reduced fares on an ongoing basis, including daily tickets caps. Encouraging the public back on to public transport is also critical for reaching net zero goals. Labour must also get behind bus franchising at the local level – which would enable metro mayors to regulate a fragmented privatised system – and facilitate the rollout of the same approach in areas that don’t have a metro mayor. Where providers are failing, be it bus or rail, Labour must be clear that there will be no dodging of fines, no bonuses, and that contracts will be at risk. For large-scale inter-city transport, the suggestion for Labour is simple. Commit to the proposed plans for HS2 and Northern Powerhouse Rail in full to increase connectivity and capacity across the north. This would be a critical way of boosting both private and additional public investment in the north. The “red wall” voters who are losing trust in the government’s attempts to level up will no doubt take note, too. The dreaded train fare rises will kick in in March. Against a backdrop of fundamentally flawed train services, unaffordable bus fares and “performance” bonuses for the companies entrusted with running our public infrastructure, fare rises will be hard to stomach for those of us living and working in the north. A simple backbone of infrastructure stretching from north to south and east to west should be the basic starting point. Following through on promises to invest, paying hardworking staff properly, and prioritising passengers above profit are all necessary and possible. If Labour wants to jump ahead on levelling up and prioritise plans on net zero, getting our basic transport infrastructure right has surely got to be the first step. Zoë Billingham is the director of the thinktank IPPR North As the Tories flatline, two big questions must prey on Keir Starmer’s mind: can he win, and will a government that he leads really change British society? According to one way of thinking, these are unconnected dilemmas – Labour just needs to get over the line and only then worry about what needs to be done. But means and ends can never be separated. How Starmer wins will shape how he governs. In our tumultuous times, winning office is necessary but not sufficient; winning the power to act in big ways over a long time is essential. So how can the Labour leader both win and be prepared for what comes next?Labour’s lead hovers at about 20%. But remember that under our first past the post (FPTP) electoral system, where it’s the spread of support across the country that counts, Labour needs a lead of 12% for any parliamentary majority. Historically, the trend is that governments recover as they get closer to election day. Regression analysis of previous midterm leads show that a 28% lead tends to result in an eight-point margin of victory on election day. That would put Labour deep in hung-parliamentary territory. The loss of a dozen seats through boundary changes and voter suppression through ballot ID checks combine to make things even harder. And Labour’s lead looks soft. A recent poll conducted for the Win As One campaign, which I helped to lead, shows that 63% of voters believe Starmer’s current lead is down to negative views of the government, not positive views of Labour. The injustice of the voting system and the way it skews political debate should lead Starmer to see that the answer to winning and governing lies in pluralism, alliances and proportional representation (PR).FPTP is the toxic glue that holds together a centralised winner-takes-all system, privileging the interests of the already powerful and a few swing voters in a few swing seats, tilting our politics to the right whoever wins. PR would weaken the grip of regressives on our country simply by making every vote count, helping progressives win office and real power. There was a big progressive majority in 2019, but you wouldn’t think it from the result: 16. 2 million people backed progressive parties and only 13. 9 million supported the Tory and Brexit parties. But they won an 80-seat majority because they formed a pact and didn’t split their votes. FPTP isn’t just unfair, it also forces Labour to the right. Take the issue of immigration. The country is evenly split between those who think it’s a good thing and those who don’t. But the positive votes tend to pile up and be wasted in only 25% of seats. So, it’s little surprise that politicians pander their message to the other 75% of seats. It is what leads us to the situation where Nigel Farage is saying he backs Starmer’s stance on immigration. So, we have lost before an election is even called. The same dynamic is repeated across the policy agenda. People want climate action and social justice, but the political system works against it. In this way, democracy is a first-order issue for Labour. Unless we change the system, we can’t change society. At the launch of the Gordon Brown’s report on the future of UK democracy, Starmer rightly said: “People up and down this country are crying out for a new approach.”Starmer doesn’t have to follow the Tories on immigration to win – he could be more humane and still reach No 10 | Maya GoodfellowRead moreBut the report was strangely silent on PR, given the Labour conference had overwhelmingly backed it as a policy just two months before. Labour advocating for it now would encourage mass tactical voting to win and forge an alliance to govern on the big challenges of inequality, climate chaos, housing and social care. Instead, by fighting on the terrain of elites, swing voters and the demands of the rightwing media, any Labour victory is in danger of caging itself in. Recent polling shows there is both majority support for proportional representation (56%) and remarkable backing for progressive parties to work together in government (78%), with 71% believing candidates should stand aside for each other to win. Just as the right already do. This is the path to victory and a new society. But the Labour machine still refuses to back PR. At best, this represents an out-of-date technocratic and paternalist culture seeking to do politics to people. At worst, its twisted goal is to retain a monopoly of opposition by stopping other parties and new entrants competing fairly. But guaranteed second place or occasional periods in office on Tory terrain are no longer good enough. In his campaign to win the Labour leadership, Starmer backed the case for voting reform. Now it seems he needs a nudge. Thus, it ever was. Real power is never given away. It is waged and won by combining morality with force. We can look for inspiration to the Scottish parliament, only realised through a huge civic campaign. And because we know that in 1997 Labour promised voting reform but refused to deliver on it, the case for change through citizens’ pressure must be maintained whatever the election result. The polls are likely too close. Starmer, his party and candidates will want as much support as possible. The condition must be their backing for real democratic reform. They can be bent to a better politics. These are not normal times, and politics as normal will not do. Neal Lawson is director of the cross-party campaign organisation Compass